2

GOODYEAR DUNLOP TIRES OPERATIONS, S. A.
v. BROWN
Syllabus
personal jurisdiction over an out-of-state defendant who has “certain
minimum contacts with [the State] such that the maintenance of the
suit does not offend ‘traditional notions of fair play and substantial
justice.’ ” Id., at 316. Endeavoring to give specific content to the “fair
play and substantial justice” concept, the Court in International Shoe
classified cases involving out-of-state corporate defendants. First,
the Court recognized that jurisdiction could be asserted where the
corporation’s in-state activity is “continuous and systematic” and
gave rise to the episode-in-suit. Id., at 317. It also observed that the
commission of “single or occasional acts” in a State may be sufficient
to render a corporation answerable in that State with respect to those
acts, though not with respect to matters unrelated to the forum con
nections. Id., at 318. These two categories compose what is now
known as “specific jurisdiction.” Helicopteros Nacionales de Colom
bia, S. A. v. Hall, 466 U. S. 408, 414, n. 8. International Shoe distin
guished from cases that fit within the “specific jurisdiction” catego
ries, “instances in which the continuous corporate operations within a
state [are] so substantial and of such a nature as to justify suit
against it on causes of action arising from dealings entirely distinct
from those activities.” 326 U. S., at 318. Adjudicatory authority so
grounded is now called “general jurisdiction.” Helicopteros, 466 U. S.,
at 414, n. 9. Since International Shoe, this Court’s decisions have
elaborated primarily on circumstances that warrant the exercise of
specific jurisdiction. In only two decisions postdating International
Shoe has this Court considered whether an out-of-state corporate de
fendant’s in-state contacts were sufficiently “continuous and system
atic” to justify the exercise of general jurisdiction over claims unre
lated to those contacts: Perkins v. Benguet Consol. Mining Co., 342
U. S. 437; and Helicopteros, 466 U. S. 408. Pp. 6–9.
(b) Petitioners lack “the kind of continuous and systematic general
business contacts” necessary to allow North Carolina to entertain a
suit against them unrelated to anything that connects them to the
State. Helicopteros, 466 U. S., at 416. The stream-of-commerce cases
on which the North Carolina court relied relate to exercises of specific
jurisdiction in products liability actions, in which a nonresident de
fendant, acting outside the forum, places in the stream of commerce a
product that ultimately causes harm inside the forum. Many state
long-arm statutes authorize courts to exercise specific jurisdiction
over manufacturers when the events in suit, or some of them, oc
curred within the forum State. The North Carolina court’s stream-of
commerce analysis elided the essential difference between case
specific and general jurisdiction. Flow of a manufacturer’s products
into the forum may bolster an affiliation germane to specific jurisdic
tion, see, e.g., World-Wide Volkswagen Corp. v. Woodson, 444 U. S.

