14

GOODYEAR DUNLOP TIRES OPERATIONS, S. A.
v. BROWN 

Opinion of the Court 


respondents would have us pierce Goodyear corporate
veils, at least for jurisdictional purposes. See Brilmayer &
Paisley, Personal Jurisdiction and Substantive Legal
Relations: Corporations, Conspiracies, and Agency, 74 Cal.
L. Rev. 1, 14, 29–30 (1986) (merging parent and subsidiary
for jurisdictional purposes requires an inquiry “compara
ble to the corporate law question of piercing the corporate
veil”). But see 199 N. C. App., at 64, 681 S. E. 2d, at 392
(North Carolina Court of Appeals understood that peti
tioners are “separate corporate entities . . . not directly re
sponsible for the presence in North Carolina of tires that
they had manufactured”). Neither below nor in their brief
in opposition to the petition for certiorari did respondents
urge disregard of petitioners’ discrete status as subsidiar
ies and treatment of all Goodyear entities as a “unitary
business,” so that jurisdiction over the parent would draw
in the subsidiaries as well.6 Brief for Respondents 44.
Respondents have therefore forfeited this contention, and
we do not address it. This Court’s Rule 15.2; Granite Rock
Co. v. Teamsters, 561 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip op., at 16).
*
*
*
For the reasons stated, the judgment of the North Caro
lina Court of Appeals is
Reversed.
——————
6 In the brief they filed in the North Carolina Court of Appeals, re
spondents stated that petitioners were part of an “integrated world
wide efforts to design, manufacture, market and sell their tires in the
United States, including in North Carolina.” App. 485 (emphasis
added). See also Brief in Opposition 18. Read in context, that assertion
was offered in support of a narrower proposition: The distribution of
petitioners’ tires in North Carolina, respondents maintained, demon
strated petitioners’ own “calculated and deliberate efforts to take
advantage of the North Carolina market.” App. 485. As already
explained, see supra, at 12–13, even regularly occurring sales of a
product in a State do not justify the exercise of jurisdiction over a claim
unrelated to those sales.

