Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of the Court

do not here deny, that the type of tire involved in the
accident, a Goodyear Regional RHS tire manufactured
by Goodyear Turkey, was never distributed in North
Carolina.
Petitioners moved to dismiss the claims against them
for want of personal jurisdiction. The trial court denied
the motion, and the North Carolina Court of Appeals af
firmed. Acknowledging that the claims neither “related
to, nor . . . ar[o]se from, [petitioners’] contacts with North
Carolina,” the Court of Appeals confined its analysis to
“general rather than specific jurisdiction,” which the court
recognized required a “higher threshold” showing: A de
fendant must have “continuous and systematic contacts”
with the forum. Id., at 58, 681 S. E. 2d, at 388 (internal
quotation marks omitted). That threshold was crossed,
the court determined, when petitioners placed their tires
“in the stream of interstate commerce without any limita
tion on the extent to which those tires could be sold in
North Carolina.” Id., at 67, 681 S. E. 2d, at 394.
Nothing in the record, the court observed, indicated
that petitioners “took any affirmative action to cause tires
which they had manufactured to be shipped into North
Carolina.” Id., at 64, 681 S. E. 2d, at 392. The court
found, however, that tires made by petitioners reached
North Carolina as a consequence of a “highly-organized
distribution process” involving other Goodyear USA sub
sidiaries. Id., at 67, 681 S. E. 2d, at 394. Petitioners, the
court noted, made “no attempt to keep these tires from
reaching the North Carolina market.” Id., at 66, 681 S. E.
2d, at 393. Indeed, the very tire involved in the accident,
the court observed, conformed to tire standards estab
lished by the U. S. Department of Transportation and bore
markings required for sale in the United States. Ibid.2 As
——————
2 Such markings do not necessarily show that any of the tires were
destined for sale in the United States. To facilitate trade, the Solicitor

