4

GOODYEAR DUNLOP TIRES OPERATIONS, S. A.
v. BROWN 

Opinion of the Court 


and inspection” of the tire. 199 N. C. App., at 51, 681 S. E.
2d, at 384 (internal quotation marks omitted).
Goodyear Luxembourg Tires, SA (Goodyear Luxem
bourg), Goodyear Lastikleri T. A. S. (Goodyear Turkey),
and Goodyear Dunlop Tires France, SA (Goodyear
France), petitioners here, were named as defendants.
Incorporated in Luxembourg, Turkey, and France, respec
tively, petitioners are indirect subsidiaries of Goodyear
USA, an Ohio corporation also named as a defendant in
the suit. Petitioners manufacture tires primarily for sale
in European and Asian markets. Their tires differ in size
and construction from tires ordinarily sold in the United
States. They are designed to carry significantly heavier
loads, and to serve under road conditions and speed limits
in the manufacturers’ primary markets.1
In contrast to the parent company, Goodyear USA,
which does not contest the North Carolina courts’ personal
jurisdiction over it, petitioners are not registered to do
business in North Carolina. They have no place of busi
ness, employees, or bank accounts in North Carolina.
They do not design, manufacture, or advertise their prod
ucts in North Carolina. And they do not solicit business in
North Carolina or themselves sell or ship tires to North
Carolina customers. Even so, a small percentage of peti
tioners’ tires (tens of thousands out of tens of millions
manufactured between 2004 and 2007) were distributed
within North Carolina by other Goodyear USA affiliates.
These tires were typically custom ordered to equip special
ized vehicles such as cement mixers, waste haulers, and
boat and horse trailers. Petitioners state, and respondents
——————
1 Respondents portray Goodyear USA’s structure as a reprehensible
effort to “outsource” all manufacturing, and correspondingly, tort
litigation, to foreign jurisdictions. See Brief for Respondents 51–53.
Yet Turkey, where the tire alleged to have caused the accident-in-suit
was made, is hardly a strange location for a facility that primarily
supplies markets in Europe and Asia.

