Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

1

SCALIA, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 10–6549
_________________

BILLY JOE REYNOLDS, PETITIONER v. UNITED 

STATES 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE THIRD CIRCUIT

[January 23, 2012]


JUSTICE SCALIA, with whom JUSTICE GINSBURG joins,
dissenting.
In my view, the registration requirements of the Sex
Offender Registration and Notification Act (Act), 120 Stat.
590, 42 U. S. C. §16901 et seq. (2006 ed. and Supp. III),
apply of their own force, without action by the Attorney
General. The Act’s statement that “[t]he Attorney General
shall have the authority to specify the applicability of
the [registration] requirements” to pre-Act sex offenders,
§16913(d), is best understood as conferring on the Attorney General an authority to make exceptions to the otherwise applicable registration requirements.
To begin with, I do not share the Court’s belief that
to “specify the applicability” more naturally means, in the
present context, to “make applicable” rather than to “make
inapplicable.” See ante, at 7. The example the Court
gives, the Commissioner of Baseball’s “ ‘authority to specify the applicability’ ” of more stringent minor-league drug
testing policies to the major leagues, ibid., is entirely
inapt, because it deals with a policy that on its face is
otherwise not applicable. Since the major leagues are not
covered by the policies, the Commissioner’s “ ‘authority to
specify [their] applicability’ ” can mean nothing else but the
authority to render them applicable. What we have here,
however, is a statute that states in unqualified terms that


2

REYNOLDS v. UNITED STATES
SCALIA, J., dissenting

“a sex offender shall register,” §16913(a)—and that the
Court rightly believes was meant to cover pre-Act offenders.* The issue is whether “specify the applicability”
means that no pre-Act offenders need register unless the
Attorney General says so, or rather that the Attorney
General may excuse the unqualified requirement for preAct offenders. In that context, it seems to me that the
latter meaning is more natural. One specifies the applicability of an application that already exists by describing or
revising its contours.
I think it preferable to give “specify” this meaning not
only because here it is more natural, but also because
the alternative is to read the statute as leaving it up to the
Attorney General whether the registration requirement
would ever apply to pre-Act offenders, even though registration of pre-Act offenders was (as the Court acknowledges) what the statute sought to achieve. For the statute
does not instruct the Attorney General to specify; it merely
gives him “authority” to do so. In this respect, the provision at issue here stands in marked contrast to other
provisions of the Act which clearly impose duties on the
Attorney General. See, e.g., §16912(b) (“The Attorney
General shall issue guidelines and regulations to interpret
and implement this subchapter”); §16917(b) (“The Attorney General shall prescribe rules for the notification of
[certain] sex offenders”); §16919(a) (“The Attorney General
shall maintain a national database”); §16926(a) (“The
Attorney General shall establish and implement a Sex
Offender Management Assistance program”).
——————
* The Court reaches this conclusion based on an inquiry into legislative history. See ante, at 9–10. That inquiry is quite superf luous,
however since the text of the Act itself makes clear that Congress
sought to “establis[h] a comprehensive national system for the registration of [sex offenders],” 42 U. S. C. §16901, with “sex offender” defined
broadly to “mea[n] an individual who was convicted of a sex offense,”
§16911(1) (emphasis added).


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

SCALIA, J., dissenting

The Court’s response to this—that “there was no need
for a mandatory requirement to avoid [the] unrealistic
possibility” that the Attorney General would not specify,
ante, at 12—seems to me a fine answer to the question
“What mandatory requirements must a poorly drafted
statute contain in order to be workable?” It is an inadequate answer, however, to the question that is relevant
here: “Would Congress have written the provision this way
if it wanted pre-Act offenders covered and did not think
they were covered absent specification by the Attorney General?” Intelligently drafted statutes make mandatory
those executive acts essential to their functioning, whether
or not those acts would likely occur anyway. It would have
taken little effort (in fact, less effort) for Congress to write
“the Attorney General shall specify the applicability”
instead of “the Attorney General shall have authority to
specify the applicability.” The latter formulation confers
discretion, and it is simply implausible that the Attorney
General was given discretion to determine whether coverage of pre-Act offenders (one of the purposes of the Act)
should exist.
Indeed, it is not entirely clear to me that Congress
can constitutionally leave it to the Attorney General to
decide—with no statutory standard whatever governing his
discretion—whether a criminal statute will or will not
apply to certain individuals. That seems to me sailing
close to the wind with regard to the principle that legislative powers are nondelegable, see Whitman v. American
Trucking Assns., Inc., 531 U. S. 457, 472–476 (2001);
Loving v. United States, 517 U. S. 748, 776–777 (1996)
(SCALIA, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment), and “[i]t is our settled policy to avoid an interpretation of a federal statute that engenders constitutional
issues if a reasonable alternative interpretation poses
no constitutional question.” Gomez v. United States, 490
U. S. 858, 864 (1989). Construing the Act to give the


4

REYNOLDS v. UNITED STATES
SCALIA, J., dissenting

Attorney General the power to reduce congressionally
imposed requirements fits that bill, because such a power
is little more than a formalized version of the timehonored practice of prosecutorial discretion.
The Court points out that there might have been need
for “different federal registration treatment of different
categories of pre-Act offenders,” ante, at 8, and that absent
a “ruling from the Attorney General” pre-Act offenders
would be uncertain “about whether, or how, the new registration requirements applied to them,” ante, at 9. But
attending to those details would certainly come within the
Attorney General’s authority to “specify” application of the
Act—and so would the temporary suspension of registration requirements pending the Attorney General’s resolution of those details. And of course the uncertainty of
where to register could form the basis for the Attorney
General’s exercise of his discretion not to prosecute in
individual cases. Neither problem, it seems to me, justifies the extraordinary interpretation that this Act does not
apply to pre-Act offenders unless and until the Attorney
General, in his discretion, says so.
For these reasons, I respectfully dissent.

