(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

REYNOLDS v. UNITED STATES
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE THIRD CIRCUIT
No. 10–6549. Argued October 3, 2011—Decided January 23, 2012
The federal Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act (Act) requires convicted sex offenders to provide state governments with, and
to update, information, e.g., names and current addresses, for state
and federal sex offender registries. It is a crime if a person who is
“required to register under [the Act]” and who “travels in interstate
. . . commerce” knowingly “fails to register or update a registration.”
18 U. S. C. §2250(a). The Act defines “sex offender” to include offenders who were convicted before the Act’s effective date, 42 U. S. C.
§16911(1), and says that “the Attorney General shall have the authority to specify the applicability of the [registration] requirements”
to pre-Act offenders, §16913(d). The Act, which seeks to make more
uniform and effective a patchwork of pre-Act federal and 50 state registration systems, became law in July 2006. In February 2007, the
Attorney General promulgated an Interim Rule specifying that the
Act applies to all pre-Act offenders. He has since promulgated further rules, regulations, and specifications.
Petitioner Reynolds, a pre-Act offender, registered in Missouri in
2005 but moved to Pennsylvania in September 2007 without updating the Missouri registration or registering in Pennsylvania. He was
indicted for failing to meet the Act’s registration requirements between September 16 and October 16, 2007. He moved to dismiss the
indictment on the ground that the Act was not applicable to pre-Act
offenders during that time, arguing that the Attorney General’s February 2007 Interim Rule was invalid because it violated the Constitution’s “nondelegation” doctrine and the Administrative Procedure
Act’s notice and comment requirements. The District Court rejected
on the merits of Reynolds’ legal attack on the Interim Rule, but the
Third Circuit rejected his argument without reaching the merits,


2

REYNOLDS v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
concluding that the Act’s registration requirements applied to pre-Act
offenders even in the absence of a rule by the Attorney General.
Thus, it found, the Interim Rule’s validity made no legal difference in
the outcome.

Held: The Act does not require pre-Act offenders to register before the
Attorney General validly specifies that the Act’s registration provisions apply to them. Pp. 6–13.
(a) This conclusion is supported by a natural reading of the Act’s
text, which consists of four statements. Statement One says that “[a]
sex offender shall register, and keep the registration current.”
Statement Two says that, generally, the offender must initially register before completing his “sentence of imprisonment.” Statement
Three says that the sex offender must update a registration within
three business days of any change of “name, residence, employment,
or student status.” Statement Four says that “[t]he Attorney General
shall have the authority to specify the applicability of the requirements . . . to sex offenders convicted before the enactment of” the Act.
§16913. Read naturally, the Fourth Statement modifies the First. It
deals specifically with a subset (pre-Act offenders) of the First Statement’s broad general class (all sex offenders) and thus should control
the Act’s application to that subset. See Gozlon-Peretz v. United
States, 498 U. S. 395, 407. Also, by giving the Attorney General authority to specify the Act’s “applicability,” not its “nonapplicability,”
the Fourth Statement is more naturally read to confer authority to
apply the Act, not authority to make exceptions. This reading efficiently resolves what may have been Congress’ concern about the
practical problems of applying the new registration requirements to a
large number of pre-Act offenders, which could have been expensive
and might not have proved feasible to do immediately. It might have
thought that such concerns warranted different treatment for different categories of pre-Act offenders. And it could have concluded that
it was efficient and desirable to ask the Justice Department, charged
with responsibility for implementation, to examine pre-Act offender
problems and to apply the new requirements accordingly. This reading also takes Congress to have filled potential lacunae (created by
related Act provisions) in a manner consistent with basic criminal
law principles. The Second Statement, e.g., requires a sex offender to
register before completing his prison term, but says nothing about
when a pre-Act offender who has left prison is to register. An Attorney General ruling could diminish such uncertainties, helping to
eliminate the kind of vagueness and uncertainty that criminal law
must seek to avoid. Pp. 6–9.
(b) The Government’s three principal contrary arguments—that
the Court’s reading conflicts with the Act’s purpose of establishing a


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
national registration system that includes pre-Act offenders; that the
Court’s reading could lead to an absurdly long implementation delay;
and that the Act should be read to apply the requirements immediately and on their own to all pre-Act offenders to avoid the possibility
that the Attorney General, who has, but is not required to use, “the
authority to specify” requirements, might take no action—are unpersuasive. Some lower courts have read the Attorney General’s authority to apply only to pre-Act sex offenders who are unable to comply
with the statute’s “initial registration” requirements, but that is not
what the Act says. Pp. 9–13.
(c) Because the Act’s registration requirements do not apply to preAct offenders until the Attorney General so specifies, the question
whether the Attorney General’s Interim Rule is a valid specification
matters in this case. P. 13.
380 Fed. Appx. 125, reversed and remanded.
BREYER, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and KENNEDY, THOMAS, ALITO, SOTOMAYOR, and KAGAN, JJ.,
joined. SCALIA, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which GINSBURG, J.,
joined.

