Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

Opinion of the Court

here it is overwhelmed by text, by our tradition of judicial
sentencing,5 and by the accompanying desideratum that
sentencing not be left to employees of the same Department of Justice that conducts the prosecution.6 Moreover,
when the district court’s failure to “anticipat[e] developments that take place after the first sentencing,” Brief
for United States 29, produces unfairness to the defendant, the Act provides a mechanism for relief. Section
3582(c)(1)(A) provides that a district court,
“upon motion of the Director of the Bureau of Prisons,
may reduce the term of imprisonment . . . after con——————
5 To support its view that Congress authorized the Bureau to make
concurrent-vs.-consecutive decisions, the dissent relies on the fact that
the Executive long had what is effectively sentencing authority in its
ability to grant or deny parole. That is a particularly curious power for
the dissent to rely upon, inasmuch as most of the dissent discusses (in
great detail) the Sentencing Reform Act, whose principal objective was
to eliminate the Executive’s parole power. Curiouser still is the dissent’s
invocation of the Guidelines system, which “tell[s] the sentencing judge
how, through the use of partially concurrent and partially consecutive
sentences, to build a total sentence that meets the Guidelines’ requirements.” Post, at 4. These “instructions,” ibid., do not cover yet-to-beimposed sentences, the dissent says, because “the sentencing judge
normally does not yet know enough about the behavior that underlies
(or will underlie)” such a sentence. Post, at 5. That explains, perhaps,
why the Guidelines’ “instructions” to judges do not cover them. But
why do not the Guidelines “instruct” the Bureau of Prisons how to
conduct its concurrent/consecutive sentencing? If the reason is (as we
suspect) that the Sentencing Commission does not have, or does not
believe it has, authority to “instruct” the Bureau of Prisons, the dissent’s entire argument based upon what it calls “the purposes and the
mechanics of the SRA’s sentencing system,” post, at 6, falls apart. Yetto-be-imposed sentences are not within the system at all, and we are
simply left with the question whether judges or the Bureau of Prisons
is responsible for them. For the reasons we have given, we think it is
judges.
6 Of course, a district court should exercise the power to impose anticipatory consecutive (or concurrent) sentences intelligently. In some
situations, a district court may have inadequate information and may
forbear, but in other situations, that will not be the case.

