Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of the Court

sure that the sentence imposed is “sufficient, but not
greater than necessary,” §3553(a), the argument goes, if
one does not know how long it will actually be. But the
district judge faces the same uncertainty if the concurrentvs.-consecutive decision is left for later resolution by the
Bureau of Prisons; he does not know, for example, whether
the 5-year sentence he imposes will be an actual five years
or will be simply swallowed within another sentence. To
be sure, the Bureau of Prisons, if it waits to decide the
matter until after the state court has imposed its sentence,
will know for sure what sentences it is dealing with. But
the Bureau is not charged with applying §3553(a). The
factors that guide the agency’s “place of imprisonment”
decision do include “the nature and circumstances of the
offense” and “the history and characteristics of the prisoner,” §3621(b)(2), (b)(3) (2006 ed.)—factors that are, to be
sure, relevant to sentencing but also relevant to selection
of the place of confinement; but they also include factors
that make little, if any, sense in the sentencing context,
such as “the resources of the facility contemplated” and
whether the state facility “meets minimum standards of
health and habitability,” §3621(b), (b)(1). (These factors
confirm our view that §3621 is not a sentencing provision
but a place-of-confinement provision.) It is much more
natural for a judge to apply the §3553(a) factors in making
all concurrent-vs.-consecutive decisions, than it is for some
such decisions to be made by a judge applying §3553(a)
factors and others by the Bureau of Prisons applying
§3621(b) factors.
The final objection is that principles of federalism and
good policy do not allow a district court to make the
concurrent-vs.-consecutive decision when it does not have
before it all of the information about the anticipated state
sentence. As for principles of federalism, it seems to us
they cut in precisely the opposite direction. In our American system of dual sovereignty, each sovereign—whether

