(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

SETSER v. UNITED STATES
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–7387. Argued November 30, 2011—Decided March 28, 2012
When petitioner Setser was indicted in a Texas court on drug charges,
the State also moved to revoke the probation term that he was then
serving for another drug offense. At about the same time, Setser
pleaded guilty to federal drug charges. The Federal District Court
imposed a 151-month sentence to run consecutively to any state sentence imposed for the probation violation, but concurrently with any
state sentence imposed on the new drug charge. While Setser’s federal appeal was pending, the state court sentenced him to 5 years for
the probation violation and 10 years for the drug charge, but ordered
the sentences to be served concurrently. The Fifth Circuit affirmed
the federal sentence, holding that the District Court had authority to
order a sentence consecutive to an anticipated state sentence, and
that Setser’s sentence was reasonable, even if the state court’s decision made it unclear exactly how to administer it.
Held:
1. The District Court had discretion to order that Setser’s federal
sentence run consecutively to his anticipated state sentence for the
probation violation. Pp. 2–12.
(a) Judges have traditionally had broad discretion in selecting
whether the sentences they impose will run concurrently or consecutively with respect to other sentences that they impose, or that have
been imposed in other proceedings, including state proceedings, see
Oregon v. Ice, 555 U. S. 160, 168–169. The statutory text and structure do not foreclose a district court’s exercise of this discretion with
respect to anticipated state sentences. The Sentencing Reform Act of
1984 addresses the concurrent-vs.-consecutive decision, but not the
situation here, since the District Court did not impose “multiple
terms of imprisonment . . . at the same time,” and Setser was not “al-

