Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of the Court

and decide how the state and federal sentences will fit
together. The issue here is who will make that decision,
which in turn determines when that decision is made.
One possible answer, and the one the Fifth Circuit gave, is
that the decision belongs to the Federal District Court at
the federal sentencing hearing.
The concurrent-vs.-consecutive decision has been addressed by §212(a) of the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984,
18 U. S. C. §3584, reproduced in full as Appendix A, infra.
The first subsection of that provision, which says when
concurrent and consecutive sentences may be imposed,
and specifies which of those dispositions will be assumed
in absence of indication by the sentencing judge, does not
cover the situation here. It addresses only “multiple terms
of imprisonment . . . imposed . . . at the same time” and “a
term of imprisonment . . . imposed on a defendant who is
already subject to an undischarged term of imprisonment.”
§3584(a). Here the state sentence is not imposed at the
same time as the federal sentence, and the defendant was
not already subject to that state sentence.
Setser, supported by the Government, argues that, because §3584(a) does not cover this situation, the District
Court lacked authority to act as it did; and that the
concurrent-vs.-consecutive decision is therefore to be made
by the Bureau of Prisons at any time after the federal sentence has been imposed. The Bureau of Prisons is said to
derive this authority from 18 U. S. C. §3621(b) (2006 ed.
and Supp. IV), reproduced in full as Appendix B, infra.
On its face, this provision says nothing about concurrent
or consecutive sentences, but the Government explains its
position as follows: Section 3621(b) gives the Bureau the
authority to order that a prisoner serve his federal sentence in any suitable prison facility “whether maintained
by the Federal Government or otherwise.” The Bureau
may therefore order that a prisoner serve his federal
sentence in a state prison. Thus, when a person subject to

