Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

BREYER, J., dissenting

occasional incoherence. For example, the statute, after
setting forth the court’s authority to impose a sentence
of imprisonment that runs either concurrently or consecutively with other terms imposed in the same or in earlier
proceedings, creates an exception that says: “except that
the terms may not run consecutively for an attempt and
for another offense that was the sole objective of the attempt.” 18 U. S. C. §3584(a). Now suppose the Court
were right, and a sentencing judge had the authority to
run a present term consecutively with a not-yet-imposed
future term. Would it not be important to apply this same
“attempt” exception in such instances as well? Indeed,
the exception is phrased in categorical terms, and the legislative history in no way indicates that the exception applies only occasionally. See S. Rep. No. 98–225, at 126
(“[C]onsecutive terms of imprisonment may not, contrary
to current law, be imposed for [attempt] and for an offense
that was the sole objective of the attempt” (emphasis
added)). Yet it is difficult, if not impossible, to read the
statute’s language as broadening the exception beyond the
statutorily listed scenarios.
Or, consider, for example, an offender tried for arguably
related crimes in two different federal courts at two different times. The Court’s reading would not only allow the
second judge to order concurrent service with the first
sentence if warranted, as the statute explicitly permits,
but it would also allow the first judge to make an analogous but anticipatory order based upon the sentence he
expected the second judge would impose. But where complex forms of criminal behavior are at issue, these different judges may reach different conclusions. The result
may well be conflict and confusion.
Finally, as I said above, supra, at 5–6, a more practical
solution to potential problems presented by a future sentencing proceeding lies closer at hand. The BOP has the
statutory authority to effect concurrent service of federal

