2

SETSER v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
ready subject to” the state sentences at issue, 18 U. S. C. §3584(a).
This does not mean, as Setser and the Government claim, that the
District Court lacked authority to act as it did and that the Bureau of
Prisons is to make the concurrent-vs.-consecutive decision after the
federal sentence has been imposed. Section 3621(b), from which the
Bureau claims to derive this authority, says nothing about concurrent or consecutive sentences. And it is more natural to read
§3584(a) as leaving room for the exercise of judicial discretion in situations not covered than it is to read §3621(b) as giving the Bureau
what amounts to sentencing authority. Setser’s arguments to the
contrary are unpersuasive. Pp. 2–8.
(b) None of the other objections raised by Setser and the Government requires a different result. Pp. 8–12.
2. The state court’s subsequent decision to make the state sentences run concurrently does not establish that the Federal District Court
imposed an unreasonable sentence. The difficulty here arises not
from the federal-court sentence—which is to run concurrently with
one state sentence and consecutively with another—but from the
state court’s decision. Deciding which of the District Court’s dispositions should prevail under these circumstances is a problem, but it
does not show the District Court’s sentence to be unlawful. The reasonableness standard for reviewing federal sentences asks whether
the district court abused its discretion, see Gall v. United States, 552
U. S. 38, 46, but Setser identifies no flaw in the District Court’s decisionmaking process, nor anything available at the time of sentencing
that the court failed to consider. Where late-onset facts make it difficult, or even impossible, to implement the sentence, the Bureau of
Prisons may determine, in the first instance, how long the District
Court’s sentence authorizes it to continue Setser’s confinement, subject to the potential for judicial review. Pp. 12–14.

607 F. 3d 128, affirmed.
SCALIA, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and THOMAS, ALITO, SOTOMAYOR, and KAGAN, JJ., joined. BREYER,
J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which KENNEDY and GINSBURG, JJ.,
joined.

