Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

BREYER, J., dissenting

sentence be consecutive to an anticipated state sentence
that has not yet been imposed.” Ante, at 1. For one thing,
nothing in the statute explicitly grants the judge that
authority. The text refers to other circumstances, those
that involve earlier or contemporaneous (multiple-count)
convictions, while it does not refer to later imposed
sentences.
For another, exercise of any such authority would more
likely hinder than advance the basic objectives of the SRA.
As I have explained, supra, at 2–5, a sentencing judge
typically needs detailed information when constructing a
multiple-count or multiple-conviction Guideline sentence.
The fact that the future sentence has not yet been imposed
means that information will often be lacking, and that in
turn means that the exercise of such authority would risk
confusion and error. A sentencing judge who believes, for
example, that the future conviction will be based upon
different relevant conduct (and consequently orders a
consecutive sentence) could discover that the second conviction rests upon the same relevant conduct (warranting
a concurrent sentence). Mistakes of this kind increase the
risk of sentencing disparity and, insofar as the first judge
guesses wrong, they can mean a less honest sentencing
process as well.
Further, I can find no significant tradition (preGuideline or post-Guideline) of federal judges imposing a
sentence that runs consecutively with a sentence not yet
imposed. The Court refers to four Courts of Appeals cases
for the proposition that “traditionally” a judge possessed
this authority. Ante, at 4. The opinions in three of the
cases are each about a page long and do not discuss the
matter here at issue. (They assume, without significant
discussion, the existence of the relevant sentencing authority.) See Anderson v. United States, 405 F. 2d 492,
493 (CA10 1969) (per curiam) (addressing the question
whether a federal sentence runs from the date of its impo-

