Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

BREYER, J., dissenting

tory provisions assure sentencing judges that they retain
the power to reach a different conclusion.
At this point, I would ask the question that this case
poses. Why does the statute say nothing about a sentencing judge imposing a sentence that might run consecutively with a sentence that a (typically different) judge has
not yet imposed? The answer is this: Because the sentencing judge normally does not yet know enough about the
behavior that underlies (or will underlie) a sentence that
has not yet been imposed. Normally the sentencing judge
does not know, for example, (a) what that sentence will be,
(b) whether the behavior underlying that later sentence
constitutes part of the same course of behavior that underlies the present sentence or, instead, is totally separate
from the behavior underlying the present sentence, or (c)
is partly the same and partly different. Even if the judge
has an idea about what will happen, he does not know
precisely what will happen; and precision in this matter is
important.
In a word, the sentencing judge normally does not yet
know enough about what will happen in the sentencingproceeding-yet-to-come to be able to construct a sentence
that meets the Guidelines’ instructions and which, in
doing so, helps to assure that different individuals who
engage in the same criminal behavior will typically receive
roughly comparable sentences.
Of course, the Court is correct when it says that eventually the sentences will run (either wholly in or in part)
concurrently or consecutively. And someone must decide
how they will run. Ante, at 2–3. But the Court is not
correct when it says that this someone should be the first
federal sentencing judge. Rather, the Executive and
Judicial Branches have devised a system that can draw
upon the intentions of that first federal judge, while applying them in light of actual knowledge about what later
happened. The Bureau of Prisons (BOP) in effect makes

