4

SETSER v. UNITED STATES
BREYER, J., dissenting

with multiple convictions) what to do where that is so.
Reflecting these, and other, complexities, the Guidelines
contain complex instructions about how to sentence where
the offender is convicted of “Multiple Counts,” see USSG
§3D, or has previously been convicted of a crime for which
he is “subject to an Un-discharged Term of Imprisonment,”
see §5G1.3. The Guidelines also tell the sentencing judge
how, through the use of partially concurrent and partially
consecutive sentences, to build a total sentence that meets
the Guidelines’ requirements. See §§5G1.2(d), 5G1.3.
With this background it becomes easier to understand
the statutory provisions before us. They reflect the fact
that Congress expected sentencing judges, when faced
with a defendant convicted of multiple crimes, to construct
a sentence that would, at least to a degree, reflect the
defendant’s real underlying behavior. Where two convictions reflect in whole or in part the same behavior, the
overall sentences should reflect that fact, say by running
concurrently.
Accordingly, the statute says that “[m]ultiple terms of
imprisonment imposed at the same time run concurrently
unless the court orders or the statute mandates that the
terms are to run consecutively.” 18 U. S. C. §3584(a). And
that statement reflects the fact that often (but not always)
multiple convictions after a single trial will reflect a single course of behavior (different aspects of which violate
different criminal statutes). The statute also says that
“[m]ultiple terms of imprisonment imposed at different
times run consecutively unless the court orders that the
terms are to run concurrently.” Ibid. This statement
reflects the fact that several convictions imposed after
different trials are more likely to reflect unrelated behaviors. In the first instance that the statute addresses,
concurrent sentences are more likely to be appropriate;
in the second, consecutive sentences are more likely to be
appropriate. But that is not always so. Thus the statu-

