Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

BREYER, J., dissenting

statutory offenses, while keying them to specific individual
Guidelines that determine sentence based upon likely
actual behavior). In the event, the Guidelines move the
sentencing system in this direction while simultaneously
recognizing that other factors require considerable modification of the real offense principle. See USSG §1A4(a)
(“real offense vs. charge offense sentencing”).
Nonetheless the “real offense” goal influenced the Act’s,
and the Commission’s, objectives in respect to the sentencing of an offender with multiple convictions. Insofar as
several convictions arise out of the same course of behavior, the sentencing judge should treat the crimes underlying the convictions as if they were all part of a single crime
and sentence accordingly. But, insofar as the crimes underlying the convictions arise out of different courses of
behavior, the sentencing judge should treat the crimes
underlying the convictions as if they were not part of a
single crime and should see that the ultimate sentence
reflects that fact.
To achieve these objectives is easier said than done. For
one thing, it requires a definition of what counts as the
same course of behavior. The Guidelines set forth that
definition in §1B1.3, p. 1.17 (“Relevant Conduct”). For
another thing, statutes and Guidelines that set forth
related instructions must take into account the fact that
sentencing-related circumstances can prove highly complex. To take a fairly simple example, suppose that a
defendant is convicted of both robbery and impersonating
a federal official, that he has engaged in a single course of
behavior, but that neither the robbery nor the impersonation Guidelines take account of the other. Instructions
about concurrent/consecutive sentences must give the
judge an idea about what to do in such a case. They must
also take account of the fact that a maximum penalty
contained in a statute will trump a greater penalty contained in a Guideline. And they must tell the judge (faced

