6

SETSER v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

already subject to an undischarged term of imprisonment.”
Since the District Court was not imposing the state sentence and since it was not already imposed, the sentence
could not be ordered to run consecutively. But if the text
is exclusive—if the addition of only is correct—the provision forbids not only the imposition of consecutive sentences, but the imposition of concurrent ones as well. And
yet, as Setser acknowledges, it must be one or the other;
someone must decide the issue.
Setser’s response is that, read in context, the sentence
speaks only to district courts. Under the circumstances at
issue here, he says, the federal and state sentences still
might run either concurrently or consecutively, but just
not at the discretion of the District Court. That is an odd
parsing of the text, which makes no distinction between
the district court and the Bureau of Prisons. The placement of §3584 does indeed suggest that it is directed at
district courts—but that is likely because Congress contemplated that only district courts would have the authority to make the concurrent-vs.-consecutive decision, not
because Congress meant to leave the Bureau unfettered.
Indeed, the Bureau already follows the other directives in
§3584(a). See Brief for United States 35. For example, if
the district court imposes multiple terms of imprisonment
at the same time, but fails to address the concurrent-vs.consecutive issue, the terms “run concurrently,” §3584(a),
and the Bureau is not free to use its “place of imprisonment” authority to achieve a different result.3
The Latin maxim on which Setser relies—expressio
——————
3 The Government contends that the Bureau applies the default rules
in §3584(a) “[a]s a matter of discretion” but is not “ ‘bound’ ” by that
subsection. Reply Brief for United States 15, n. 5. We think it implausible that the effectiveness of those rules—of §3584(a)’s prescription, for
example, that “[m]ultiple terms of imprisonment imposed at different
times run consecutively unless the court orders that the terms are to
run concurrently”—depends upon the “discretion” of the Bureau.

