10

SETSER v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

the Federal Government or a State—is responsible for “the
administration of [its own] criminal justice syste[m].” Ice,
555 U. S., at 170. If a prisoner like Setser starts in state
custody, serves his state sentence, and then moves to
federal custody, it will always be the Federal Government—whether the district court or the Bureau of Prisons—that decides whether he will receive credit for the
time served in state custody. And if he serves his federal
sentence first, the State will decide whether to give him
credit against his state sentences without being bound by
what the district court or the Bureau said on the matter.
Given this framework, it is always more respectful of the
State’s sovereignty for the district court to make its decision up front rather than for the Bureau of Prisons to
make the decision after the state court has acted. That
way, the state court has all of the information before it
when it acts.4 The Government’s position does not promote the States’ interest—just the interests of the Bureau
of Prisons.
As for good policy: The basic claim of Setser, the Government, and the dissent is that when it comes to sentencing, later is always better because the decisionmaker has
more information. See, e.g., post, at 7 (“[A] sentencing
judge typically needs detailed information when constructing a multiple-count or multiple-conviction Guideline
sentence”). That is undoubtedly true, but when that
desideratum is applied to the statutory structure before us
——————
4 Setser notes that the text of §3584(a) does not distinguish between
state and federal sentences. If a district court can enter a consecutive
sentencing order in advance of an anticipated state sentence, he asks,
what is to stop it from issuing such an order in advance of an anticipated federal sentence? It could be argued that §3584(a) impliedly
prohibits such an order because it gives that decision to the federal
court that sentences the defendant when the other sentence is “already”
imposed—and does not speak (of course) to what a state court must do
when a sentence has already been imposed. It suffices to say, however,
that this question is not before us.

