Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

unius est exclusio alterius—might have application here if
the provision in question were a conferral of authority on
district courts. Giving sentencing authority in only specified circumstances could be said to imply that it is withheld in other circumstances. Section 3584, however, is
framed not as a conferral of authority but as a limitation
of authority that already exists (and a specification of
what will be assumed when the exercise of that authority
is ambiguous). It reads not “District courts shall have
authority to impose multiple terms of imprisonment on a
defendant at the same time, etc.” but rather “If multiple
terms of imprisonment are imposed on a defendant at
the same time, [etc.]”—quite clearly assuming that such authority already exists. The mere acknowledgment of the
existence of certain pre-existing authority (and regulation
of that authority) in no way implies a repeal of other preexisting authority. And that is especially true when there
is an obvious reason for selecting the instances of preexisting authority that are addressed—to wit, that they
are the examples of sentencing discretion most frequently
encountered.
Moreover, expressio unius est exclusio alterius is a
double-edged sword. Setser thinks it suggests that, because
§3584(a) recognizes judicial discretion in scenario A and
scenario B, there is no such discretion in scenario C. But
the same maxim shows much more convincingly why
§3621(b) cannot be read to give the Bureau of Prisons
exclusive authority to make the sort of decision committed
to the district court in §3584(a). When §3584(a) specifically addresses decisions about concurrent and consecutive
sentences, and makes no mention of the Bureau’s role in
the process, the implication is that no such role exists.
And that conclusion is reinforced by application of the
same maxim (properly, in this instance) to §3621(b)—
which is a conferral of authority on the Bureau of Prisons,
but does not confer authority to choose between concur-

