Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

1

ALITO, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 09–1233
_________________

EDMUND G. BROWN, JR., GOVERNOR OF CAL- 

IFORNIA, ET AL., APPELLANTS v. MARCIANO 

PLATA ET AL. 

ON APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURTS 

FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT AND THE NORTHERN

DISTRICT OF CALIFORNIA

[May 23, 2011] 


JUSTICE ALITO, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE joins,
dissenting.
The decree in this case is a perfect example of what
the Prison Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (PLRA), 110 Stat.
1321–66, was enacted to prevent.
The Constitution does not give federal judges the au
thority to run state penal systems. Decisions regarding
state prisons have profound public safety and financial
implications, and the States are generally free to make
these decisions as they choose. See Turner v. Safley, 482
U. S. 78, 85 (1987).
The Eighth Amendment imposes an important—but
limited—restraint on state authority in this field. The
Eighth Amendment prohibits prison officials from depriving inmates of “the minimal civilized measure of life’s
necessities.” Rhodes v. Chapman, 452 U. S. 337, 347
(1981). Federal courts have the responsibility to ensure
that this constitutional standard is met, but undesirable
prison conditions that do not violate the Constitution are
beyond the federal courts’ reach.
In this case, a three-judge court exceeded its authority
under the Constitution and the PLRA. The court ordered
a radical reduction in the California prison population


2

BROWN v. PLATA
ALITO, J., dissenting

without finding that the current population level violates
the Constitution.
Two cases were before the three-judge court, and neither
targeted the general problem of overcrowding. Indeed, the
plaintiffs in one of those cases readily acknowledge that
the current population level is not itself unconstitutional.
Brief for Coleman Appellees 56. Both of the cases were
brought not on behalf of all inmates subjected to over
crowding, but rather in the interests of much more limited
classes of prisoners, namely, those needing mental health
treatment and those with other serious medical needs.
But these cases were used as a springboard to implement
a criminal justice program far different from that chosen
by the state legislature. Instead of crafting a remedy to
attack the specific constitutional violations that were
found—which related solely to prisoners in the two plain
tiff classes—the lower court issued a decree that will at
best provide only modest help to those prisoners but that
is very likely to have a major and deleterious effect on
public safety.
The three-judge court ordered the premature release of
approximately 46,000 criminals—the equivalent of three
Army divisions.
The approach taken by the three-judge court flies in the
face of the PLRA. Contrary to the PLRA, the court’s rem
edy is not narrowly tailored to address proven and ongoing
constitutional violations. And the three-judge court vio
lated the PLRA’s critical command that any court con
templating a prisoner release order must give “substantial
weight to any adverse impact on public safety.” 18
U. S. C. §3626(a)(1)(A). The three-judge court would have
us believe that the early release of 46,000 inmates will not
imperil—and will actually improve—public safety. Juris.
Statement App., O. T. 2009, No. 09–416, pp. 248a–249a
(hereinafter Juris. App.). Common sense and experience
counsel greater caution.


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

ALITO, J., dissenting

I would reverse the decision below for three interrelated
reasons. First, the three-judge court improperly refused
to consider evidence concerning present conditions in the
California prison system. Second, the court erred in hold
ing that no remedy short of a massive prisoner release can
bring the California system into compliance with the
Eighth Amendment. Third, the court gave inadequate
weight to the impact of its decree on public safety.
I
Both the PLRA and general principles concerning in
junctive relief dictate that a prisoner release order cannot
properly be issued unless the relief is necessary to remedy
an ongoing violation. Under the PLRA, a prisoner release
may be decreed only if crowding “is the primary cause” of
an Eighth Amendment violation and only if no other re
lief “will remedy” the violation. §3626(a)(3)(E) (emphasis
added). This language makes it clear that proof of past
violations alone is insufficient to justify a court-ordered
prisoner release.
Similarly, in cases not governed by the PLRA, we have
held that an inmate seeking an injunction to prevent a
violation of the Eighth Amendment must show that prison
officials are “knowingly and unreasonably disregarding an
objectively intolerable risk of harm, and that they will
continue to do so . . . into the future.” Farmer v. Brennan,
511 U. S. 825, 846 (1994). The “deliberate indifference”
needed to establish an Eighth Amendment violation must
be examined “in light of the prison authorities’ current
attitudes and conduct,” Helling v. McKinney, 509 U. S. 25,
36 (1993), which means “their attitudes and conduct at the
time suit is brought and persisting thereafter,” Farmer,
supra, at 845.
For these reasons, the propriety of the relief ordered
here cannot be assessed without ascertaining the nature
and scope of any ongoing constitutional violations. Proof


4

BROWN v. PLATA
ALITO, J., dissenting

of past violations will not do; nor is it sufficient simply
to establish that some violations continue. The scope of
permissible relief depends on the scope of any continuing
violations, and therefore it was essential for the three
judge court to make a reliable determination of the extent
of any violations as of the time its release order was is
sued. Particularly in light of the radical nature of its
chosen remedy, nothing less than an up-to-date assess
ment was tolerable.
The three-judge court, however, relied heavily on out
dated information and findings and refused to permit
California to introduce new evidence. Despite evidence of
improvement,1 the three-judge court relied on old findings
made by the single-judge courts, see Juris. App. 76a–77a,
including a finding made 14 years earlier, see id., at 170a
(citing Coleman v. Wilson, 912 F. Supp. 1282, 1316, 1319
(ED Cal. 1995)). The three-judge court highlighted death
statistics from 2005, see Juris. App. 9a, while ignoring the
“significant and continuous decline since 2006,” California
Prison Health Care Receivership Corp., K. Imai, Analysis
of Year 2008 Death Reviews 31 (Dec. 2009) (hereinafter
2008 Death Reviews). And the court dwelled on conditions
at a facility that has since been replaced. See Juris. App.
19a–20a, 24a, 89a–90a, 94a, 107a, 111a.
Prohibiting the State from introducing evidence about
conditions as of the date when the prisoner release order
was under consideration, id., at 76a–78a, and n. 42, the
three-judge court explicitly stated that it would not “evalu
ate the state’s continuing constitutional violations.” Id., at
——————
1 Before requesting the appointment of a three-judge court, the Dis
trict Court in Coleman recognized “commendable progress” in the
State’s effort to provide adequate mental health care, Juris. App. 294a,
and the District Court in Plata acknowledged that “the Receiver has
made much progress since his appointment,” id., at 280a. The report of
the Special Master to which the Court refers, ante, at 18–19, identifies
a “generally positive trend.” App. 803.


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

ALITO, J., dissenting

77a. Instead, it based its remedy on constitutional defi
ciencies that, in its own words, were found “years ago.”
Ibid.2
The three-judge court justified its refusal to receive up
to-date evidence on the ground that the State had not filed
a motion to terminate prospective relief under a provision
of the PLRA, §3626(b). See Juris. App. 77a. Today’s
opinion for this Court endorses that reasoning, ante, at 26.
But the State’s opportunity to file such a motion did not
eliminate the three-judge court’s obligation to ensure that
its relief was necessary to remedy ongoing violations.3
Moreover, the lower court’s reasoning did not properly
take into account the potential significance of the evidence
that the State sought to introduce. Even if that evidence
did not show that all violations had ceased—the showing
needed to obtain the termination of relief under
§3626(b)—that evidence was highly relevant with respect
to the nature and scope of permissible relief.4
——————
2 For

this reason, it is simply not the case that “evidence of current
conditions . . . informed every aspect of the judgment of the three-judge
court,” as the majority insists, ante, at 25.
3 Because the Ninth Circuit places the burden on the State to prove
the absence of an ongoing violation when it moves to terminate pro
spective relief, see Gilmore v. California, 220 F. 3d 987, 1007 (CA9
2000), even if the State had unsuccessfully moved to terminate pro
spective relief under 18 U. S. C. §3626(b), there would still have been no
determination that plaintiffs had carried their burden under the PLRA
to establish by clear and convincing evidence that a prisoner release
order is necessary to correct an ongoing rights violation.
4 It is also no answer to say, as the Court now does, ante, at 26, that
the State had the opportunity to resist the convening of the three-judge
court on the ground that there were no unremedied constitutional
violations as of that date. See §3626(a)(3)(A)(i). The District Courts
granted plaintiffs’ motions to convene a three-judge court in 2007, three
years before the remedial decree here was issued. Thus, the conditions
in the prison system as of the date when the decree was issued were not
necessarily the same as those that existed before the three-judge court
proceedings began. Moreover, as noted above, even if all of the viola
tions in the system had not been cured at the time of the remedial


6

BROWN v. PLATA
ALITO, J., dissenting

The majority approves the three-judge court’s refusal to
receive fresh evidence based largely on the need for “[o]r
derly trial management.” Ante, at 26. The majority rea
sons that the three-judge court had closed the book on the
question of constitutional violations and had turned to
the question of remedy. Ibid. As noted, however, the extent of any continuing constitutional violations was highly
relevant to the question of remedy.
The majority also countenances the three-judge court’s
reliance on dated findings. The majority notes that the
lower court considered recent reports by the Special Mas
ter and Receiver, ante, at 18–19, but the majority provides
no persuasive justification for the lower court’s refusal to
receive hard, up-to-date evidence about any continuing
violations. With the safety of the people of California in
the balance, the record on this issue should not have been
closed.
The majority repeats the lower court’s error of reciting
statistics that are clearly out of date. The Court notes
the lower court’s finding that as of 2005 “an inmate in one
of California’s prisons needlessly dies every six to seven
days.” See ante, at 9. Yet by the date of the trial before
the three-judge court, the death rate had been trending
downward for 10 quarters, App. 2257, and the number of
likely preventable deaths fell from 18 in 2006 to 3 in 2007,
a decline of 83 percent.5 Between 2001 and 2007, the
——————
decree, an accurate assessment of conditions as of that date was essen
tial in order to ensure that the relief did not sweep more broadly than
necessary.
5 2008 Death Reviews 22. The majority elides the improvement by
combining likely preventable deaths with those that were “possibly
preventable,” ante, at 7, n. 4, that is, cases in which “[i]n the judgment
of the reviewer,” 2008 Death Reviews 3, “it’s fifty-fifty that better care
would have possibly prevented the death,” App. 2277; id., at 2256. As
the majority acknowledges, even this class of cases is now dramatically
diminished, and the three-judge court must take the current conditions
into account when revising its remedy going forward. Ante, at 7, n. 4.


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

ALITO, J., dissenting

California prison system had the 13th lowest average
mortality rate of all 50 state systems.6
The majority highlights past instances in which particu
lar prisoners received shockingly deficient medical care.
See ante, at 5, 6–7, 10 (recounting five incidents). But
such anecdotal evidence cannot be given undue weight in
assessing the current state of the California system. The
population of the California prison system (156,000 in
mates at the time of trial) is larger than that of many
medium-sized cities,7 and an examination of the medical
care provided to the residents of many such cities would
likely reveal cases in which grossly deficient treatment
was provided. Instances of past mistreatment in the
California system are relevant, but prospective relief must
be tailored to present and future, not past, conditions.
II
Under the PLRA, a court may not grant any prospective
relief unless the court finds that the relief is narrowly
drawn, extends no further than necessary to correct the
“violation of [a] Federal right, and is the least intrusive
means necessary to correct the violation of the Federal
right.” §3626(a)(1)(A). In addition, the PLRA prohibits
the issuance of a prisoner release order unless the court
——————
6 Bureau of Justice Statistics, State Prison Deaths, 2001–2007, avail
able at http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2093 (Table
13) (all Internet materials as visited May 20, 2011, and available in
Clerk of Court’s case file); see also App. 2257–2258. California had the
14th lowest “ ‘average annual illness mortality [rate] per 100,000 state
prisoners from 2001 to 2004.’ ” Juris. App. 125a. According to a 2007
report, state prisoners had a 19 percent lower death rate than the
general U. S. adult population as of 2004. Bureau of Justice Statistics,
Medical Causes of Death in State Prisons, 2001–2004, p. 1, available at
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/content/pub/pdf/mcdsp04.pdf.
7 For example, the population of the California prison system exceeds that of Syracuse, New York; Bridgeport, Connecticut; Springfield,
Massachusetts; Eugene, Oregon; and Savannah, Georgia.


8

BROWN v. PLATA
ALITO, J., dissenting

finds “by clear and convincing evidence that . . . crowding
is the primary cause of the violation of a Federal right”
and that “no other relief will remedy the violation of the
Federal right.” §3626(a)(3)(E).
These statutory restrictions largely reflect general
standards for injunctive relief aimed at remedying consti
tutional violations by state and local governments. “The
power of the federal courts to restructure the operation of
local and state governmental entities is not plenary. . . .
Once a constitutional violation is found, a federal court is
required to tailor the scope of the remedy to fit the nature
and extent of the constitutional violation.” Dayton Bd. of
Ed. v. Brinkman, 433 U. S. 406, 419–420 (1977) (internal
quotation marks omitted).
Here, the majority and the court below maintain that no
remedy short of a massive release of prisoners from the
general prison population can remedy the State’s failure to
provide constitutionally adequate health care. This argu
ment is implausible on its face and is not supported by the
requisite clear and convincing evidence.
It is instructive to consider the list of deficiencies in the
California prison health care system that are highlighted
in today’s opinion for this Court and in the opinion of the
court below. The deficiencies noted by the majority here
include the following: “ ‘[e]xam tables and counter tops,
where prisoners with . . . communicable diseases are
treated, [are] not routinely disinfected,’ ” ante, at 10; medi
cal facilities “ ‘are in an abysmal state of disrepair,’ ” ibid.;
medications “ ‘are too often not available when needed,’ ”
ante, at 10–11; “ ‘[b]asic medical equipment is often not
available or used,’ ” ante, at 10; prisons “would ‘hire any
doctor who had “a license, a pulse and a pair of shoes,” ’ ”
ibid.; and medical and mental health staff positions have
high vacancy rates, ante, at 20. The three-judge court
pointed to similar problems. See Juris. App. 93a–121a
(citing, among other things, staffing vacancies, too few


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

ALITO, J., dissenting

beds for mentally ill prisoners, and an outmoded records
management system).
Is it plausible that none of these deficiencies can be
remedied without releasing 46,000 prisoners? Without
taking that radical and dangerous step, exam tables and
counter tops cannot properly be disinfected? None of the
system’s dilapidated facilities can be repaired? Needed
medications and equipment cannot be purchased and
used? Staff vacancies cannot be filled? The qualifica
tions of prison physicians cannot be improved? A better
records management system cannot be developed and
implemented?
I do not dispute that general overcrowding contributes to
many of the California system’s healthcare problems. But
it by no means follows that reducing overcrowding is the
only or the best or even a particularly good way to allevi
ate those problems. Indeed, it is apparent that the pris
oner release ordered by the court below is poorly suited for
this purpose. The release order is not limited to prisoners
needing substantial medical care but instead calls for a
reduction in the system’s overall population. Under the
order issued by the court below, it is not necessary for
a single prisoner in the plaintiff classes to be released.
Although some class members will presumably be among
those who are discharged, the decrease in the number of
prisoners needing mental health treatment or other forms
of extensive medical care will be much smaller than the
total number of prisoners released, and thus the release
will produce at best only a modest improvement in the
burden on the medical care system.
The record bears this out. The Special Master stated
dramatically that even releasing 100,000 inmates (two
thirds of the California system’s entire inmate popula
tion!) would leave the problem of providing mental health
treatment “largely unmitigated.” App. 487. Similarly, the
Receiver proclaimed that “ ‘those . . . who think that popu


10

BROWN v. PLATA
ALITO, J., dissenting

lation controls will solve California’s prison health care
problems . . . are simply wrong.’ ” Juris. App. 282a.
The State proposed several remedies other than a mas
sive release of prisoners, but the three-judge court, seem
ingly intent on attacking the broader problem of general
overcrowding, rejected all of the State’s proposals. In
doing so, the court made three critical errors.
First, the court did not assess those proposals and other
remedies in light of conditions proved to exist at the time
the release order was framed. Had more recent evidence
been taken into account, a less extreme remedy might
have been shown to be sufficient.
Second, the court failed to distinguish between condi
tions that fall below the level that may be desirable as a
matter of public policy and conditions that do not meet the
minimum level mandated by the Constitution. To take
one example, the court criticized the California system
because prison doctors must conduct intake exams in
areas separated by folding screens rather than in separate
rooms, creating conditions that “do not allow for appropri
ate confidentiality.” Id., at 88a. But the legitimate pri
vacy expectations of inmates are greatly diminished, see
Hudson v. Palmer, 468 U. S. 517, 525–526 (1984), and this
Court has never suggested that the failure to provide
private consultation rooms in prisons amounts to cruel
and unusual punishment.
Third, the court rejected alternatives that would not
have provided “ ‘immediate’ ” relief. Juris. App. 148a. But
nothing in the PLRA suggests that public safety may be
sacrificed in order to implement an immediate remedy
rather than a less dangerous one that requires a more
extended but reasonable period of time.
If the three-judge court had not made these errors, it is
entirely possible that an adequate but less drastic reme
dial plan could have been crafted. Without up-to-date
information, it is not possible to specify what such a plan


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

ALITO, J., dissenting

might provide, and in any event, that is not a task that
should be undertaken in the first instance by this Court.
But possible components of such a plan are not hard to
identify.
Many of the problems noted above plainly could be
addressed without releasing prisoners and without in
curring the costs associated with a large-scale prison
construction program. Sanitary procedures could be im
proved; sufficient supplies of medicine and medical
equipment could be purchased; an adequate system of
records management could be implemented; and the num
ber of medical and other staff positions could be increased.
Similarly, it is hard to believe that staffing vacancies
cannot be reduced or eliminated and that the qualifica
tions of medical personnel cannot be improved by any
means short of a massive prisoner release. Without spe
cific findings backed by hard evidence, this Court should
not accept the counterintuitive proposition that these
problems cannot be ameliorated by increasing salaries,
improving working conditions, and providing better train
ing and monitoring of performance.
While the cost of a large-scale construction program
may well exceed California’s current financial capabilities,
a more targeted program, involving the repair and per
haps the expansion of current medical facilities (as op
posed to general prison facilities), might be manageable.
After all, any remedy in this case, including the new pro
grams associated with the prisoner release order and
other proposed relief now before the three-judge court, will
necessarily involve some state expenditures.
Measures such as these might be combined with tar
geted reductions in critical components of the State’s
prison population. A certain number of prisoners in the
classes on whose behalf the two cases were brought might
be transferred to out-of-state facilities. The three-judge
court rejected the State’s proposal to transfer prisoners to


12

BROWN v. PLATA
ALITO, J., dissenting

out-of-state facilities in part because the number of pro
posed transfers was too small. See id., at 160a. See also
ante, at 30. But this reasoning rested on the court’s insis
tence on a reduction in the State’s general prison popula
tion rather than the two plaintiff classes.
When the State proposed to make a targeted transfer of
prisoners in one of the plaintiff classes (i.e., prisoners
needing mental health treatment), one of the District
Judges blocked the transfers for fear that the out-of-state
facilities would not provide a sufficiently high level of care.
See App. 434–440. The District Judge even refused to
allow out-of-state transfers for prisoners who volunteered
for relocation. See id., at 437. And the court did this even
though there was not even an allegation, let alone clear
evidence, that the States to which these prisoners would
have been sent were violating the Eighth Amendment.
The District Judge presumed that the receiving States
might fail to provide constitutionally adequate care, but
“ ‘in the absence of clear evidence to the contrary, courts
presume that [public officers] have properly discharged
their official duties.’ ” United States v. Armstrong, 517
U. S. 456, 464 (1996) (quoting United States v. Chemical
Foundation, Inc., 272 U. S. 1, 14–15 (1926)); Postal Service
v. Gregory, 534 U. S. 1, 10 (2001) (“[A] presumption of
regularity attaches to the actions of Government agen
cies”); see also McKune v. Lile, 536 U. S. 24, 51 (2002)
(O’Connor, J., concurring in judgment) (“[W]e may assume
that the prison is capable of controlling its inmates so that
respondent’s personal safety is not jeopardized . . . ,at least
in the absence of proof to the contrary”).8
Finally, as a last resort, a much smaller release of pris
——————
8 The Court rejects the State’s argument that out-of-state transfers offer
a less restrictive alternative to a prisoner release order because “requir
ing out-of-state transfers itself qualifies as a population limit under the
PLRA.” Ante, at 29–30. But the PLRA does not apply when the State
voluntarily conducts such transfers, as it has sought to do.


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

ALITO, J., dissenting

oners in the two plaintiff classes could be considered.
Plaintiffs proposed not only a systemwide population cap,
but also a lower population cap for inmates in specialized
programs. Tr. 2915:12–15 (Feb. 3, 2009). The three-judge
court rejected this proposal, and its response exemplified
what went wrong in this case. One judge complained that
this remedy would be deficient because it would protect
only the members of the plaintiff classes. The judge
stated:
“The only thing is we would be protecting the class
members. And maybe that’s the appropriate thing to
do. I mean, that’s what this case is about, but it
would be . . . difficult for me to say yes, and the hell
with everybody else.” Id., at 2915:23–2916:2.
Overstepping his authority, the judge was not content to
provide relief for the classes of plaintiffs on whose behalf
the suit before him was brought. Nor was he content to
remedy the only constitutional violations that were
proved—which concerned the treatment of the members of
those classes. Instead, the judge saw it as his responsibil
ity to attack the general problem of overcrowding.
III
Before ordering any prisoner release, the PLRA com
mands a court to “give substantial weight to any adverse
impact on public safety or the operation of a criminal
justice system caused by the relief.” §3626(a)(1)(A). This
provision unmistakably reflects Congress’ view that pris
oner release orders are inherently risky.
In taking this view, Congress was well aware of the
impact of previous prisoner release orders. The prisoner
release program carried out a few years earlier in Phila
delphia is illustrative. In the early 1990’s, federal courts
enforced a cap on the number of inmates in the Philadel
phia prison system, and thousands of inmates were set


14

BROWN v. PLATA
ALITO, J., dissenting

free. Although efforts were made to release only those
prisoners who were least likely to commit violent crimes,
that attempt was spectacularly unsuccessful. During an
18-month period, the Philadelphia police rearrested thou
sands of these prisoners for committing 9,732 new crimes.
Those defendants were charged with 79 murders, 90
rapes, 1,113 assaults, 959 robberies, 701 burglaries, and
2,748 thefts, not to mention thousands of drug offenses.9
Members of Congress were well aware of this experience.10
Despite the record of past prisoner release orders, the
three-judge court in this case concluded that loosing
46,000 criminals would not produce a tally like that in
Philadelphia and would actually improve public safety.
Juris. App. 248a–249a. In reaching this debatable con
clusion, the three-judge court relied on the testimony of
selected experts, id., at 248a, and the majority now defers
to what it characterizes as the lower court’s findings of
fact on this controversial public policy issue, ante, at 15,
19–20, 24.
This is a fundamental and dangerous error. When a
——————
9 Hearing

on Prison Reform before the Senate Committee on the Ju
diciary, 104th Cong., 1st Sess., 49 (1995) (statement of Lynne Abraham,
District Attorney of Philadelphia); Hearings before the Subcommittee
on Crime of the House Committee on the Judiciary, 104th Cong., 1st
Sess., 259 (1995) (same); see also Hearing before the Subcommittee on
Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security of the House Committee on
the Judiciary, 110th Cong., 2d Sess., 31 (2008) (statement of Sarah V.
Hart, Assistant District Attorney, Philadelphia District Attorney’s
Office).
10 Condemning the inappropriate imposition of prison population
caps, Senator Sarbanes cited “the case of Philadelphia, where a court
ordered prison cap has put thousands of violent criminals back on
the city’s streets, often with disastrous consequences.” 141 Cong. Rec.
26549 (1995). Senator Abraham complained that “American citizens
are put at risk every day by court decrees . . . that cure prison crowding
by declaring that we must free dangerous criminals before they have
served their time.” Id., at 26448. “The most egregious example,” he
added, “is the city of Philadelphia.” Ibid.


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

ALITO, J., dissenting

trial court selects between the competing views of experts
on broad empirical questions such as the efficacy of
preventing crime through the incapacitation of convicted
criminals, the trial court’s choice is very different from a
classic finding of fact and is not entitled to the same de
gree of deference on appeal.
The particular three-judge court convened in this case
was “confident” that releasing 46,000 prisoners pursuant
to its plan “would in fact benefit public safety.” Juris.
App. 248a–249a. According to that court, “overwhelming
evidence” supported this purported finding. Id., at 232a.
But a more cautious court, less bent on implementing its
own criminal justice agenda, would have at least acknowl
edged that the consequences of this massive prisoner
release cannot be ascertained in advance with any degree
of certainty and that it is entirely possible that this re
lease will produce results similar to those under prior
court-ordered population caps. After all, the sharp in
crease in the California prison population that the three
judge court lamented, see id., at 254a, has been accompa
nied by an equally sharp decrease in violent crime.11
These California trends mirror similar developments at
the national level,12 and “[t]here is a general consensus
that the decline in crime is, at least in part, due to more
and longer prison sentences.”13 If increased incarceration
——————
11 From 1992 to 2009, the violent crime rate in California per 100,000
residents fell from 1,119.7 to 472.0—a decrease of 57.8 percent. Simi
larly, in the United States from 1992 to 2009, the violent crime rate per
100,000 residents fell from 757.7 to 429.4—a decrease of 43.3 percent.
Dept. of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation, Uniform Crime
Reporting Statistics, http://www.ucrdatatool.gov.
12 According to the three-judge court, California’s prison population
has increased by 750 percent since the mid-1970’s. Juris. App. 254a.
From 1970 to 2005, the Nation’s prison population increased by 700
percent. Public Safety, Public Spending: Forecasting America’s Prison
Population 2007–2011, 19 Fed. Sent. Rep. 234, 234 (2007).
13 Paternoster, How Much Do We Really Know About Criminal Deter


16

BROWN v. PLATA
ALITO, J., dissenting

in California has led to decreased crime, it is entirely
possible that a decrease in imprisonment will have the
opposite effect.
Commenting on the testimony of an expert who stated
that he could not be certain about the effect of the massive
prisoner discharge on public safety, the three-judge court
complained that “[s]uch equivocal testimony is not help
ful.” Id., at 247a. But testimony pointing out the diffi
culty of assessing the consequences of this drastic remedy
would have been valued by a careful court duly mindful of
the overriding need to guard public safety.
The three-judge court acknowledged that it “ha[d] not
evaluated the public safety impact of each individual
element” of the population reduction plan it ordered the
State to implement. App. to Juris. Statement 3a. The
majority argues that the three-judge court nevertheless
gave substantial weight to public safety because its order
left “details of implementation to the State’s discretion.”
Ante, at 41. Yet the State had told the three-judge court
that, after studying possible population reduction meas
ures, it concluded that “reducing the prison population to
137.5% within a two-year period cannot be accomplished
without unacceptably compromising public safety.” Juris.
App. 317a. The State found that public safety required a
5-year period in which to achieve the ordered reduction.
Ibid.
Thus, the three-judge court approved a population
reduction plan that neither it nor the State found could be
implemented without unacceptable harm to public safety.
And this Court now holds that the three-judge court dis
charged its obligation to “give substantial weight to any
adverse impact on public safety,” §3626(a)(1)(A), by defer
ring to officials who did not believe the reduction could be
—————— 

rence? 100 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 765, 801 (2010) (citing research

on this issue). 



Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

ALITO, J., dissenting

accomplished in a safe manner. I do not believe the
PLRA’s public-safety requirement is so trivial.
The members of the three-judge court and the experts
on whom they relied may disagree with key elements of
the crime-reduction program that the State of California
has pursued for the past few decades, including “the shift
to inflexible determinate sentencing and the passage of
harsh mandatory minimum and three-strikes laws.” Id.,
at 254a. And experts such as the Receiver are entitled to
take the view that the State should “re-thin[k] the place of
incarceration in its criminal justice system,” App. 489. But
those controversial opinions on matters of criminal justice
policy should not be permitted to override the reasonable
policy view that is implicit in the PLRA—that prisoner
release orders present an inherent risk to the safety of the
public.
*
*
*
The prisoner release ordered in this case is unprece
dented, improvident, and contrary to the PLRA. In largely
sustaining the decision below, the majority is gambling
with the safety of the people of California. Before putting
public safety at risk, every reasonable precaution should
be taken. The decision below should be reversed, and the
case should be remanded for this to be done.
I fear that today’s decision, like prior prisoner release
orders, will lead to a grim roster of victims. I hope that
I am wrong.
In a few years, we will see.

