Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

1

SCALIA, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 09–1233
_________________

EDMUND G. BROWN, JR., GOVERNOR OF CAL- 

IFORNIA, ET AL., APPELLANTS v. MARCIANO 

PLATA ET AL. 

ON APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURTS 

FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT AND THE NORTHERN

DISTRICT OF CALIFORNIA

[May 23, 2011] 


JUSTICE SCALIA, with whom JUSTICE THOMAS joins,
dissenting.
Today the Court affirms what is perhaps the most radi
cal injunction issued by a court in our Nation’s history: an
order requiring California to release the staggering num
ber of 46,000 convicted criminals.
There comes before us, now and then, a case whose
proper outcome is so clearly indicated by tradition and
common sense, that its decision ought to shape the law,
rather than vice versa. One would think that, before
allowing the decree of a federal district court to release
46,000 convicted felons, this Court would bend every effort
to read the law in such a way as to avoid that outrageous
result. Today, quite to the contrary, the Court disregards
stringently drawn provisions of the governing statute, and
traditional constitutional limitations upon the power of a
federal judge, in order to uphold the absurd.
The proceedings that led to this result were a judicial
travesty. I dissent because the institutional reform the
District Court has undertaken violates the terms of the gov
erning statute, ignores bedrock limitations on the power
of Article III judges, and takes federal courts wildly
beyond their institutional capacity.


2

BROWN v. PLATA
SCALIA, J., dissenting

I

A

The Prison Litigation Reform Act (PLRA) states that
“[p]rospective relief in any civil action with respect to
prison conditions shall extend no further than necessary
to correct the violation of the Federal right of a particular
plaintiff or plaintiffs”; that such relief must be “narrowly
drawn, [and] exten[d] no further than necessary to correct
the violation of the Federal right”; and that it must be “the
least intrusive means necessary to correct the violation of
the Federal right.” 18 U. S. C. §3626(a)(1)(A). In deciding
whether these multiple limitations have been complied
with, it is necessary to identify with precision what is the
“violation of the Federal right of a particular plaintiff or
plaintiffs” that has been alleged. What has been alleged
here, and what the injunction issued by the Court is
tailored (narrowly or not) to remedy is the running of a
prison system with inadequate medical facilities. That
may result in the denial of needed medical treatment to “a
particular [prisoner] or [prisoners],” thereby violating (ac
cording to our cases) his or their Eighth Amendment
rights. But the mere existence of the inadequate system
does not subject to cruel and unusual punishment the
entire prison population in need of medical care, including
those who receive it.
The Court acknowledges that the plaintiffs “do not base
their case on deficiencies in care provided on any one
occasion”; rather, “[p]laintiffs rely on systemwide deficien
cies in the provision of medical and mental health care
that, taken as a whole, subject sick and mentally ill pris
oners in California to ‘substantial risk of serious harm’
and cause the delivery of care in the prisons to fall below
the evolving standards of decency that mark the progress
of a maturing society.” Ante, at 7, n. 3. But our judge
empowering “evolving standards of decency” jurisprudence
(with which, by the way, I heartily disagree, see, e.g.,


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

SCALIA, J., dissenting

Roper v. Simmons, 543 U. S. 551, 615–616 (2005) (SCALIA,
J., dissenting)) does not prescribe (or at least has not until
today prescribed) rules for the “decent” running of schools,
prisons, and other government institutions. It forbids
“indecent” treatment of individuals—in the context of this
case, the denial of medical care to those who need it. And
the persons who have a constitutional claim for denial of
medical care are those who are denied medical care—not
all who face a “substantial risk” (whatever that is) of being
denied medical care.
The Coleman litigation involves “the class of seriously
mentally ill persons in California prisons,” ante, at 8, and
the Plata litigation involves “the class of state prisoners
with serious medical conditions,” ante, at 9. The plaintiffs
do not appear to claim—and it would absurd to suggest—
that every single one of those prisoners has personally
experienced “torture or a lingering death,” ante, at 13
(internal quotation marks omitted), as a consequence of
that bad medical system. Indeed, it is inconceivable that
anything more than a small proportion of prisoners in
the plaintiff classes have personally received sufficiently
atrocious treatment that their Eighth Amendment right
was violated—which, as the Court recognizes, is why the
plaintiffs do not premise their claim on “deficiencies in
care provided on any one occasion.” Ante, at 7, n. 3.
Rather, the plaintiffs’ claim is that they are all part of a
medical system so defective that some number of prisoners
will inevitably be injured by incompetent medical care,
and that this number is sufficiently high so as to render
the system, as a whole, unconstitutional.
But what procedural principle justifies certifying a class
of plaintiffs so they may assert a claim of systemic uncon
stitutionality? I can think of two possibilities, both of
which are untenable. The first is that although some or
most plaintiffs in the class do not individually have viable
Eighth Amendment claims, the class as a whole has collec


4

BROWN v. PLATA
SCALIA, J., dissenting

tively suffered an Eighth Amendment violation. That
theory is contrary to the bedrock rule that the sole purpose
of classwide adjudication is to aggregate claims that are
individually viable. “A class action, no less than tradi
tional joinder (of which it is a species), merely enables a
federal court to adjudicate claims of multiple parties at
once, instead of in separate suits. And like traditional
joinder, it leaves the parties’ legal rights and duties intact
and the rules of decision unchanged.” Shady Grove Or
thopedic Associates, P. A. v. Allstate Ins. Co., 559 U. S. ___,
___ (2010) (plurality opinion) (slip op., at 14).
The second possibility is that every member of the plain
tiff class has suffered an Eighth Amendment violation
merely by virtue of being a patient in a poorly-run prison
system, and the purpose of the class is merely to aggregate
all those individually viable claims. This theory has the
virtue of being consistent with procedural principles, but
at the cost of a gross substantive departure from our case
law. Under this theory, each and every prisoner who
happens to be a patient in a system that has systemic
weaknesses—such as “hir[ing] any doctor who had a li
cense, a pulse and a pair of shoes,” ante, at 10 (internal
quotation marks omitted)—has suffered cruel or unusual
punishment, even if that person cannot make an individu
alized showing of mistreatment. Such a theory of the
Eighth Amendment is preposterous. And we have said as
much in the past: “If . . . a healthy inmate who had suf
fered no deprivation of needed medical treatment were
able to claim violation of his constitutional right to medi
cal care . . . simply on the ground that the prison medical
facilities were inadequate, the essential distinction be
tween judge and executive would have disappeared: it
would have become the function of the courts to assure
adequate medical care in prisons.” Lewis v. Casey, 518
U. S. 343, 350 (1996).
Whether procedurally wrong or substantively wrong,


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

SCALIA, J., dissenting

the notion that the plaintiff class can allege an Eighth
Amendment violation based on “systemwide deficiencies”
is assuredly wrong. It follows that the remedy decreed
here is also contrary to law, since the theory of systemic
unconstitutionality is central to the plaintiffs’ case. The
PLRA requires plaintiffs to establish that the systemwide
injunction entered by the District Court was “narrowly
drawn” and “extends no further than necessary” to correct
“the violation of the Federal right of a particular plaintiff
or plaintiffs.” If (as is the case) the only viable constitu
tional claims consist of individual instances of mistreat
ment, then a remedy reforming the system as a whole goes
far beyond what the statute allows.
It is also worth noting the peculiarity that the vast
majority of inmates most generously rewarded by the re
lease order—the 46,000 whose incarceration will be ended—
do not form part of any aggrieved class even under the
Court’s expansive notion of constitutional violation. Most
of them will not be prisoners with medical conditions or
severe mental illness; and many will undoubtedly be fine
physical specimens who have developed intimidating
muscles pumping iron in the prison gym.
B
Even if I accepted the implausible premise that the
plaintiffs have established a systemwide violation of
the Eighth Amendment, I would dissent from the Court’s
endorsement of a decrowding order. That order is an
example of what has become known as a “structural in
junction.” As I have previously explained, structural
injunctions are radically different from the injunctions
traditionally issued by courts of equity, and presumably
part of “the judicial Power” conferred on federal courts by
Article III:
“The mandatory injunctions issued upon termination
of litigation usually required ‘a single simple act.’ H.


6

BROWN v. PLATA
SCALIA, J., dissenting

McClintock, Principles of Equity §15, pp. 32–33 (2d
ed. 1948). Indeed, there was a ‘historical prejudice of
the court of chancery against rendering decrees which
called for more than a single affirmative act.’ Id., §61,
at 160. And where specific performance of contracts
was sought, it was the categorical rule that no decree
would issue that required ongoing supervision. . . .
Compliance with these ‘single act’ mandates could, in
addition to being simple, be quick; and once it was
achieved the contemnor’s relationship with the court
came to an end, at least insofar as the subject of the
order was concerned. Once the document was turned
over or the land conveyed, the litigant’s obligation to
the court, and the court’s coercive power over the liti
gant, ceased. . . . The court did not engage in any on
going supervision of the litigant’s conduct, nor did its
order continue to regulate its behavior.” Mine Work
ers v. Bagwell, 512 U. S. 821, 841–842 (1994) (SCALIA,
J., concurring).
Structural injunctions depart from that historical prac
tice, turning judges into long-term administrators of
complex social institutions such as schools, prisons, and
police departments. Indeed, they require judges to play a
role essentially indistinguishable from the role ordinarily
played by executive officials. Today’s decision not only
affirms the structural injunction but vastly expands its
use, by holding that an entire system is unconstitutional
because it may produce constitutional violations.
The drawbacks of structural injunctions have been
described at great length elsewhere. See, e.g., Lewis,
supra, at 385–393 (1996) (THOMAS, J., concurring); Mis
souri v. Jenkins, 515 U. S. 70, 124–133 (1995) (THOMAS,
J., concurring); Horowitz, Decreeing Organizational
Change: Judicial Supervision of Public Institutions, 1983
Duke L. J. 1265. This case illustrates one of their most


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

SCALIA, J., dissenting

pernicious aspects: that they force judges to engage in a
form of factfinding-as-policymaking that is outside the
traditional judicial role. The factfinding judges tradition
ally engage in involves the determination of past or pre
sent facts based (except for a limited set of materials of
which courts may take “judicial notice”) exclusively upon
a closed trial record. That is one reason why a district
judge’s factual findings are entitled to clear-error review:
because having viewed the trial first hand he is in a better
position to evaluate the evidence than a judge reviewing a
cold record. In a very limited category of cases, judges
have also traditionally been called upon to make some
predictive judgments: which custody will best serve the
interests of the child, for example, or whether a particular
one-shot injunction will remedy the plaintiff’s grievance.
When a judge manages a structural injunction, however,
he will inevitably be required to make very broad empiri
cal predictions necessarily based in large part upon policy
views—the sort of predictions regularly made by legis
lators and executive officials, but inappropriate for the
Third Branch.
This feature of structural injunctions is superbly illus
trated by the District Court’s proceeding concerning the
decrowding order’s effect on public safety. The PLRA
requires that, before granting “[p]rospective relief in [a]
civil action with respect to prison conditions,” a court must
“give substantial weight to any adverse impact on public
safety or the operation of a criminal justice system caused
by the relief.” 18 U. S. C. §3626(a)(1)(A). Here, the Dis
trict Court discharged that requirement by making the
“factual finding” that “the state has available methods by
which it could readily reduce the prison population to
137.5% design capacity or less without an adverse impact
on public safety or the operation of the criminal justice
system.” Juris. Statement App., O. T. 2009, No. 09-416, p.
253a. It found the evidence “clear” that prison overcrowd


8

BROWN v. PLATA
SCALIA, J., dissenting

ing would “perpetuate a criminogenic prison system that
itself threatens public safety,” id., at 186a, and volun
teered its opinion that “[t]he population could be reduced
even further with the reform of California’s antiquated
sentencing policies and other related changes to the laws.”
Id., at 253a. It “reject[ed] the testimony that inmates
released early from prison would commit additional new
crimes,” id., at 200a, finding that “shortening the length of
stay through earned credits would give inmates incentives
to participate in programming designed to lower recidi
vism,” id., at 204a, and that “slowing the flow of technical
parole violators to prison, thereby substantially reducing
the churning of parolees, would by itself improve both
the prison and parole systems, and public safety.” Id., at
209a. It found that “the diversion of offenders to commu
nity correctional programs has significant beneficial ef
fects on public safety,” id., at 214a, and that “additional
rehabilitative programming would result in a significant
population reduction while improving public safety,” id., at
216a.
The District Court cast these predictions (and the Court
today accepts them) as “factual findings,” made in reliance
on the procession of expert witnesses that testified at trial.
Because these “findings” have support in the record, it is
difficult to reverse them under a plain-error standard of
review. Ante, at 38. And given that the District Court
devoted nearly 10 days of trial and 70 pages of its opinion
to this issue, it is difficult to dispute that the District
Court has discharged its statutory obligation to give “sub
stantial weight to any adverse impact on public safety.”
But the idea that the three District Judges in this case
relied solely on the credibility of the testifying expert
witnesses is fanciful. Of course they were relying largely
on their own beliefs about penology and recidivism. And
of course different district judges, of different policy views,
would have “found” that rehabilitation would not work


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

SCALIA, J., dissenting

and that releasing prisoners would increase the crime
rate. I am not saying that the District Judges rendered
their factual findings in bad faith. I am saying that it is
impossible for judges to make “factual findings” without
inserting their own policy judgments, when the factual
findings are policy judgments. What occurred here is no
more judicial factfinding in the ordinary sense than would
be the factual findings that deficit spending will not lower
the unemployment rate, or that the continued occupation
of Iraq will decrease the risk of terrorism. Yet, because
they have been branded “factual findings” entitled to
deferential review, the policy preferences of three District
Judges now govern the operation of California’s penal
system.
It is important to recognize that the dressing-up of pol
icy judgments as factual findings is not an error peculiar to this case. It is an unavoidable concomitant of insti
tutional-reform litigation. When a district court issues an
injunction, it must make a factual assessment of the an
ticipated consequences of the injunction. And when the
injunction undertakes to restructure a social institution,
assessing the factual consequences of the injunction is
necessarily the sort of predictive judgment that our sys
tem of government allocates to other government officials.
But structural injunctions do not simply invite judges to
indulge policy preferences. They invite judges to indulge
incompetent policy preferences. Three years of law school
and familiarity with pertinent Supreme Court precedents
give no insight whatsoever into the management of social
institutions. Thus, in the proceeding below the District
Court determined that constitutionally adequate medical
services could be provided if the prison population was
137.5% of design capacity. This was an empirical finding
it was utterly unqualified to make. Admittedly, the court
did not generate that number entirely on its own; it heard
the numbers 130% and 145% bandied about by various


10

BROWN v. PLATA
SCALIA, J., dissenting

witnesses and decided to split the difference. But the
ability of judges to spit back or even average-out numbers
spoon-fed to them by expert witnesses does not render
them competent decisionmakers in areas in which they
are otherwise unqualified.
The District Court also relied heavily on the views of the
Receiver and Special Master, and those reports play a
starring role in the Court’s opinion today. The Court notes
that “the Receiver and the Special Master filed reports
stating that overcrowding posed a significant barrier to
their efforts” and deems those reports “persuasive evi
dence that, absent a reduction in overcrowding, any rem
edy might prove unattainable and would at the very least
require vast expenditures of resources by the State.” Ante,
at 31–32. The use of these reports is even less consonant
with the traditional judicial role than the District Court’s
reliance on the expert testimony at trial. The latter, even
when, as here, it is largely the expression of policy judg
ments, is at least subject to cross-examination. Relying on
the un-cross-examined findings of an investigator, sent
into the field to prepare a factual report and give sugges
tions on how to improve the prison system, bears no re
semblance to ordinary judicial decisionmaking. It is true
that the PLRA contemplates the appointment of Special
Masters (although not Receivers), but Special Masters are
authorized only to “conduct hearings and prepare pro
posed findings of fact” and “assist in the development of
remedial plans,” 18 U. S. C. §3626(f)(6). This does not
authorize them to make factual findings (unconnected to
hearings) that are given seemingly wholesale deference.
Neither the Receiver nor the Special Master was selected
by California to run its prisons, and the fact that they may
be experts in the field of prison reform does not justify the
judicial imposition of their perspectives on the state.


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011) 


11

SCALIA, J., dissenting 


C

My general concerns associated with judges’ running
social institutions are magnified when they run prison
systems, and doubly magnified when they force prison
officials to release convicted criminals. As we have previ
ously recognized:
“[C]ourts are ill equipped to deal with the increasingly
urgent problems of prison administration and reform. . . . [T]he problems of prisons in America are
complex and intractable, and, more to the point, they
are not readily susceptible of resolution by decree. . . .
Running a prison is an inordinately difficult under
taking that requires expertise, planning, and the com
mitment of resources, all of which are peculiarly
within the province of the legislative and executive
branches of government. Prison is, moreover, a task
that has been committed to the responsibility of those
branches, and separation of powers concerns counsel a
policy of judicial restraint. Where a state penal sys
tem is involved, federal courts have . . . additional
reason to accord deference to the appropriate prison
authorities.” Turner v. Safley, 482 U. S. 78, 84–85
(1987) (internal quotation marks omitted).
These principles apply doubly to a prisoner-release
order. As the author of today’s opinion explained earlier
this Term, granting a writ of habeas corpus “ ‘disturbs the
State’s significant interest in repose for concluded litiga
tion, denies society the right to punish some admitted
offenders, and intrudes on state sovereignty to a degree
matched by few exercises of federal judicial authority.’ ”
Harrington v. Richter, 562 U. S. ___, ___ (2011) (slip op., at
13) (quoting Harris v. Reed, 489 U. S. 255, 282 (1989)
(KENNEDY, J., dissenting)). Recognizing that habeas relief
must be granted sparingly, we have reversed the Ninth
Circuit’s erroneous grant of habeas relief to individual


12

BROWN v. PLATA
SCALIA, J., dissenting

California prisoners four times this Term alone. Cullen
v. Pinholster, 563 U. S. ___ (2011); Felkner v. Jackson,
562 U. S. ___ (2011) (per curiam); Swarthout v. Cooke, 562
U. S. ___ (2011) (per curiam); Harrington, supra. And yet
here, the Court affirms an order granting the functional
equivalent of 46,000 writs of habeas corpus, based on its
paean to courts’ “substantial flexibility when making these
judgments.” Ante, at 41. It seems that the Court’s respect
for state sovereignty has vanished in the case where it
most matters.
II
The Court’s opinion includes a bizarre coda noting
that “[t]he State may wish to move for modification of the
three-judge court’s order to extend the deadline for the
required reduction to five years.” Ante, at 46–47. The Dis
trict Court, it says, “may grant such a request provided
that the State satisfies necessary and appropriate precon
ditions designed to ensure the measures are taken to
implement the plan without undue delay”; and it gives
vague suggestions of what these preconditions “may in
clude,” such as “interim benchmarks.” Ante, at 47. It also
invites the District Court to “consider whether it is appro
priate to order the State to begin without delay to develop
a system to identify prisoners who are unlikely to reof
fend,” and informs the State that it “should devise systems
to select those prisoners least likely to jeopardize public
safety.” Ibid. (What a good idea!)
The legal effect of this passage is unclear—I suspect
intentionally so. If it is nothing but a polite reminder to
the State and to the District Court that the injunction is
subject to modification, then it is entirely unnecessary. As
both the State and the District Court are undoubtedly
aware, a party is always entitled to move to modify an
equitable decree, and the PLRA contains an express provi
sion authorizing District Courts to modify or terminate


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

SCALIA, J., dissenting

prison injunctions. See 18 U. S. C. §3626(b).
I suspect, however, that this passage is a warning shot
across the bow, telling the District Court that it had better
modify the injunction if the State requests what we invite
it to request. Such a warning, if successful, would achieve
the benefit of a marginal reduction in the inevitable mur
ders, robberies, and rapes to be committed by the released
inmates. But it would achieve that at the expense of in
tellectual bankruptcy, as the Court’s “warning” is entirely alien to ordinary principles of appellate review of
injunctions. When a party moves for modification of
an injunction, the district court is entitled to rule on that
motion first, subject to review for abuse of discretion if it
declines to modify the order. Horne v. Flores, 557 U. S.
___, ___, ___ (2009) (slip op., at 10, 20). Moreover, when a
district court enters a new decree with new benchmarks,
the selection of those benchmarks is also reviewed under
a deferential, abuse-of-discretion standard of review—a
point the Court appears to recognize. Ante, at 45. Appel
late courts are not supposed to “affirm” injunctions while
preemptively noting that the State “may” request, and the
District Court “may” grant, a request to extend the State’s
deadline to release prisoners by three years based on some
suggestions on what appropriate preconditions for such a
modification “may” include.
Of course what is really happening here is that the
Court, overcome by common sense, disapproves of the
results reached by the District Court, but cannot remedy
them (it thinks) by applying ordinary standards of appel
late review. It has therefore selected a solution unknown
in our legal system: A deliberately ambiguous set of sug
gestions on how to modify the injunction, just deferential
enough so that it can say with a straight face that it is
“affirming,” just stern enough to put the District Court on
notice that it will likely get reversed if it does not follow
them. In doing this, the Court has aggrandized itself,


14

BROWN v. PLATA
SCALIA, J., dissenting

grasping authority that appellate courts are not supposed
to have, and using it to enact a compromise solution with
no legal basis other than the Court’s say-so. That we are
driven to engage in these extralegal activities should be a
sign that the entire project of permitting district courts to
run prison systems is misbegotten.
But perhaps I am being too unkind. The Court, or at
least a majority of the Court’s majority, must be aware
that the judges of the District Court are likely to call its
bluff, since they know full well it cannot possibly be an
abuse of discretion to refuse to accept the State’s proposed
modifications in an injunction that has just been approved
(affirmed) in its present form. An injunction, after all,
does not have to be perfect; only good enough for govern
ment work, which the Court today says this is. So perhaps
the coda is nothing more than a ceremonial washing of the
hands—making it clear for all to see, that if the terrible
things sure to happen as a consequence of this outrageous
order do happen, they will be none of this Court’s respon
sibility. After all, did we not want, and indeed even sug
gest, something better?
III
In view of the incoherence of the Eighth Amendment
claim at the core of this case, the nonjudicial features of
institutional reform litigation that this case exemplifies,
and the unique concerns associated with mass prisoner
releases, I do not believe this Court can affirm this injunc
tion. I will state my approach briefly: In my view, a court
may not order a prisoner’s release unless it determines
that the prisoner is suffering from a violation of his consti
tutional rights, and that his release, and no other relief,
will remedy that violation. Thus, if the court determines
that a particular prisoner is being denied constitutionally
required medical treatment, and the release of that pris
oner (and no other remedy) would enable him to obtain


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

SCALIA, J., dissenting

medical treatment, then the court can order his release;
but a court may not order the release of prisoners who
have suffered no violations of their constitutional rights,
merely to make it less likely that that will happen to them
in the future.
This view follows from the PLRA’s text that I discussed
at the outset, 18 U. S. C. §3626(a)(1)(A). “[N]arrowly
drawn” means that the relief applies only to the “particu
lar [prisoner] or [prisoners]” whose constitutional rights
are violated; “extends no further than necessary” means
that prisoners whose rights are not violated will not obtain
relief; and “least intrusive means necessary to correct the
violation of the Federal right” means that no other relief is
available.*
I acknowledge that this reading of the PLRA would se
verely limit the circumstances under which a court could
issue structural injunctions to remedy allegedly unconsti
tutional prison conditions, although it would not eliminate
them entirely. If, for instance, a class representing all
prisoners in a particular institution alleged that the tem
perature in their cells was so cold as to violate the Eighth
Amendment, or that they were deprived of all exercise
time, a court could enter a prisonwide injunction ordering
that the temperature be raised or exercise time be pro
vided. Still, my approach may invite the objection that the
PLRA appears to contemplate structural injunctions in
general and mass prisoner-release orders in particular.
The statute requires courts to “give substantial weight to
——————
* Any doubt on this last score, at least as far as prisoner-release or
ders are concerned, is eliminated by §3626(a)(3)(E) of the statute, which
provides that to enter a prisoner-release order the court must find
“by clear and convincing evidence that—
(i) crowding is the primary cause of the violation of a Federal right;
and
(ii) no other relief will remedy the violation of the Federal right.”


16

BROWN v. PLATA
SCALIA, J., dissenting

any adverse impact on public safety or the operation of a
criminal justice system caused by the relief” and author
izes them to appoint Special Masters, §3626 (a)(1)(A), (f),
provisions that seem to presuppose the possibility of a
structural remedy. It also sets forth criteria under which
courts may issue orders that have “the purpose or effect of
reducing or limiting the prisoner population,” §3626(g)(4).
I do not believe that objection carries the day. In addi
tion to imposing numerous limitations on the ability of
district courts to order injunctive relief with respect to
prison conditions, the PLRA states that “[n]othing in this
section shall be construed to . . . repeal or detract from
otherwise applicable limitations on the remedial powers of
the courts.” §3626(a)(1)(C). The PLRA is therefore best
understood as an attempt to constrain the discretion of
courts issuing structural injunctions—not as a mandate
for their use. For the reasons I have outlined, structural
injunctions, especially prisoner-release orders, raise grave
separation-of-powers concerns and veer significantly from
the historical role and institutional capability of courts. It
is appropriate to construe the PLRA so as to constrain
courts from entering injunctive relief that would exceed
that role and capability.
*
*
*
The District Court’s order that California release 46,000
prisoners extends “further than necessary to correct the
violation of the Federal right of a particular plaintiff or
plaintiffs” who have been denied needed medical care. 18
U. S. C. §3626(a)(1)(A). It is accordingly forbidden by the
PLRA—besides defying all sound conception of the proper
role of judges.

