Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of the Court

street, reflect the fact that the church finds much to con
demn in modern society. Its speech is “fairly characterized
as constituting speech on a matter of public concern,”
Connick, 461 U. S., at 146, and the funeral setting does
not alter that conclusion.
Snyder argues that the church members in fact mounted
a personal attack on Snyder and his family, and then
attempted to “immunize their conduct by claiming that
they were actually protesting the United States’ tolerance
of homosexuality or the supposed evils of the Catholic
Church.” Reply Brief for Petitioner 10. We are not con
cerned in this case that Westboro’s speech on public mat
ters was in any way contrived to insulate speech on a
private matter from liability. Westboro had been actively
engaged in speaking on the subjects addressed in its pick
eting long before it became aware of Matthew Snyder, and
there can be no serious claim that Westboro’s picketing
did not represent its “honestly believed” views on public
issues. Garrison, 379 U. S., at 73. There was no pre
existing relationship or conflict between Westboro and
Snyder that might suggest Westboro’s speech on public
matters was intended to mask an attack on Snyder over a
private matter. Contrast Connick, supra, at 153 (finding
public employee speech a matter of private concern when
it was “no coincidence that [the speech] followed upon the
heels of [a] transfer notice” affecting the employee).
Snyder goes on to argue that Westboro’s speech should
be afforded less than full First Amendment protection “not
only because of the words” but also because the church
members exploited the funeral “as a platform to bring
their message to a broader audience.” Brief for Petitioner
44, 40. There is no doubt that Westboro chose to stage its
picketing at the Naval Academy, the Maryland State
House, and Matthew Snyder’s funeral to increase publicity
for its views and because of the relation between those
sites and its views—in the case of the military funeral,

