Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
Snyder from liability. Westboro had been actively engaged in speak
ing on the subjects addressed in its picketing long before it became
aware of Matthew Snyder, and there can be no serious claim that the
picketing did not represent Westboro’s honestly held beliefs on public
issues. Westboro may have chosen the picket location to increase
publicity for its views, and its speech may have been particularly
hurtful to Snyder. That does not mean that its speech should be af
forded less than full First Amendment protection under the circum
stances of this case. Pp. 8–10.
That said, “ ‘[e]ven protected speech is not equally permissible in all
places and at all times.’ ” Frisby v. Schultz, 487 U. S. 474, 479.
Westboro’s choice of where and when to conduct its picketing is not
beyond the Government’s regulatory reach—it is “subject to reason
able time, place, or manner restrictions.” Clark v. Community for
Creative Non-Violence, 468 U. S. 288, 293. The facts here are quite
different, however, both with respect to the activity being regulated
and the means of restricting those activities, from the few limited
situations where the Court has concluded that the location of tar
geted picketing can be properly regulated under provisions deemed
content neutral. Frisby, supra, at 477; Madsen v. Women’s Health
Center, Inc., 512 U. S. 753, 768, distinguished. Maryland now has a
law restricting funeral picketing but that law was not in effect at the
time of these events, so this Court has no occasion to consider
whether that law is a “reasonable time, place, or manner restric
tio[n]” under the standards announced by this Court. Clark, supra,
at 293. Pp. 10–12.
The “special protection” afforded to what Westboro said, in the
whole context of how and where it chose to say it, cannot be overcome
by a jury finding that the picketing was “outrageous” for purposes of
applying the state law tort of intentional infliction of emotional dis
tress. That would pose too great a danger that the jury would punish
Westboro for its views on matters of public concern. For all these
reasons, the jury verdict imposing tort liability on Westboro for inten
tional infliction of emotional distress must be set aside. Pp. 12–13.
(b) Snyder also may not recover for the tort of intrusion upon seclu
sion. He argues that he was a member of a captive audience at his
son’s funeral, but the captive audience doctrine—which has been ap
plied sparingly, see Rowan v. Post Office Dept., 397 U. S. 728, 736–
738; Frisby, supra, at 484–485—should not be expanded to the cir
cumstances here. Westboro stayed well away from the memorial ser
vice, Snyder could see no more than the tops of the picketers’ signs,
and there is no indication that the picketing interfered with the fu
neral service itself. Pp. 13–14.
(c) Because the First Amendment bars Snyder from recovery for in

