2

SNYDER v. PHELPS
BREYER, J., concurring

of speech. But it points out that the speech, like an as
sault, seriously harmed a private individual. Indeed, the
state tort of “intentional infliction of emotional distress”
forbids only conduct that produces distress “so severe that
no reasonable man could be expected to endure it,” and
which itself is “so outrageous in character, and so extreme
in degree, as to go beyond all possible bounds of decency,
and to be regarded as atrocious, and utterly intolerable in
a civilized community.” Post, at 2–3 (opinion of ALITO, J.)
(quoting Harris v. Jones, 281 Md. 560, 567, 571, 380 A. 2d
611, 614, 616 (1977); internal quotation marks omitted).
The dissent requires us to ask whether our holding unrea
sonably limits liability for intentional infliction of emo
tional distress—to the point where A (in order to draw
attention to his views on a public matter) might launch a
verbal assault upon B, a private person, publicly revealing
the most intimate details of B’s private life, while knowing
that the revelation will cause B severe emotional harm.
Does our decision leave the State powerless to protect the
individual against invasions of, e.g., personal privacy, even
in the most horrendous of such circumstances?
As I understand the Court’s opinion, it does not hold or
imply that the State is always powerless to provide private
individuals with necessary protection. Rather, the Court
has reviewed the underlying facts in detail, as will some
times prove necessary where First Amendment values and
state-protected (say, privacy-related) interests seriously
conflict. Cf. Florida Star v. B. J. F., 491 U. S. 524, 533
(1989); Bose Corp. v. Consumers Union of United States,
Inc., 466 U. S. 485, 499 (1984). That review makes clear
that Westboro’s means of communicating its views con
sisted of picketing in a place where picketing was lawful
and in compliance with all police directions. The picketing
could not be seen or heard from the funeral ceremony
itself. And Snyder testified that he saw no more than the
tops of the picketers’ signs as he drove to the funeral. To

