Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Opinion of the Court

The funeral procession passed within 200 to 300 feet of
the picket site. Although Snyder testified that he could
see the tops of the picket signs as he drove to the funeral,
he did not see what was written on the signs until later
that night, while watching a news broadcast covering the
event. Id., at 2084–2086.1
B
Snyder filed suit against Phelps, Phelps’s daughters,
and the Westboro Baptist Church (collectively Westboro or
the church) in the United States District Court for the
District of Maryland under that court’s diversity jurisdic
tion. Snyder alleged five state tort law claims: defama
tion, publicity given to private life, intentional infliction of
emotional distress, intrusion upon seclusion, and civil
conspiracy.
Westboro moved for summary judgment
contending, in part, that the church’s speech was insu
lated from liability by the First Amendment. See 533
F. Supp. 2d 567, 570 (Md. 2008).
——————
1 A few weeks after the funeral, one of the picketers posted a message
on Westboro’s Web site discussing the picketing and containing relig
iously oriented denunciations of the Snyders, interspersed among
lengthy Bible quotations. Snyder discovered the posting, referred to by
the parties as the “epic,” during an Internet search for his son’s name.
The epic is not properly before us and does not factor in our analysis.
Although the epic was submitted to the jury and discussed in the courts
below, Snyder never mentioned it in his petition for certiorari. See Pet.
for Cert. i (“Snyder’s claim arose out of Phelps’ intentional acts at
Snyder’s son’s funeral” (emphasis added)); this Court’s Rule 14.1(g)
(petition must contain statement “setting out the facts material to
consideration of the question presented”). Nor did Snyder respond to
the statement in the opposition to certiorari that “[t]hough the epic was
asserted as a basis for the claims at trial, the petition . . . appears to be
addressing only claims based on the picketing.” Brief in Opposition 9.
Snyder devoted only one paragraph in the argument section of his
opening merits brief to the epic. Given the foregoing and the fact that
an Internet posting may raise distinct issues in this context, we decline
to consider the epic in deciding this case. See Ontario v. Quon, 560
U. S. ___, ___ – ___ (2010) (slip op., at 10–12).

