Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

Opinion of the Court

(Lexis Supp. 2010), as do 43 other States and the Federal
Government. See Brief for American Legion as Amicus
Curiae 18–19, n. 2 (listing statutes). To the extent these
laws are content neutral, they raise very different ques
tions from the tort verdict at issue in this case. Mary
land’s law, however, was not in effect at the time of the
events at issue here, so we have no occasion to consider
how it might apply to facts such as those before us, or
whether it or other similar regulations are constitutional.5
We have identified a few limited situations where the
location of targeted picketing can be regulated under
provisions that the Court has determined to be content
neutral. In Frisby, for example, we upheld a ban on such
picketing “before or about” a particular residence, 487
U. S., at 477. In Madsen v. Women’s Health Center, Inc.,
we approved an injunction requiring a buffer zone between
protesters and an abortion clinic entrance. 512 U. S. 753,
768 (1994). The facts here are obviously quite different,
both with respect to the activity being regulated and the
means of restricting those activities.
Simply put, the church members had the right to be
where they were. Westboro alerted local authorities to its
funeral protest and fully complied with police guidance on
where the picketing could be staged. The picketing was
conducted under police supervision some 1,000 feet from
the church, out of the sight of those at the church. The
protest was not unruly; there was no shouting, profanity,
or violence.
The record confirms that any distress occasioned by
Westboro’s picketing turned on the content and viewpoint
of the message conveyed, rather than any interference
with the funeral itself. A group of parishioners standing
at the very spot where Westboro stood, holding signs that
——————
5 The Maryland law prohibits picketing within 100 feet of a funeral
service or funeral procession; Westboro’s picketing would have complied
with that restriction.

