(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

SNYDER v. PHELPS ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FOURTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–751.

Argued October 6, 2010—Decided March 2, 2011

For the past 20 years, the congregation of the Westboro Baptist Church
has picketed military funerals to communicate its belief that God
hates the United States for its tolerance of homosexuality, particu
larly in America’s military. The church’s picketing has also con
demned the Catholic Church for scandals involving its clergy. Fred
Phelps, who founded the church, and six Westboro Baptist parishion
ers (all relatives of Phelps) traveled to Maryland to picket the funeral
of Marine Lance Corporal Matthew Snyder, who was killed in Iraq in
the line of duty. The picketing took place on public land approxi
mately 1,000 feet from the church where the funeral was held, in ac
cordance with guidance from local law enforcement officers. The
picketers peacefully displayed their signs—stating, e.g., “Thank God
for Dead Soldiers,” “Fags Doom Nations,” “America is Doomed,”
“Priests Rape Boys,” and “You’re Going to Hell”—for about 30 min
utes before the funeral began. Matthew Snyder’s father (Snyder), pe
titioner here, saw the tops of the picketers’ signs when driving to the
funeral, but did not learn what was written on the signs until watch
ing a news broadcast later that night.
Snyder filed a diversity action against Phelps, his daughters—who
participated in the picketing—and the church (collectively Westboro)
alleging, as relevant here, state tort claims of intentional infliction of
emotional distress, intrusion upon seclusion, and civil conspiracy. A
jury held Westboro liable for millions of dollars in compensatory and
punitive damages. Westboro challenged the verdict as grossly exces
sive and sought judgment as a matter of law on the ground that the
First Amendment fully protected its speech. The District Court re
duced the punitive damages award, but left the verdict otherwise in
tact. The Fourth Circuit reversed, concluding that Westboro’s state

