Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

ALITO, J., dissenting

why a public street in close proximity to the scene of a
funeral should be regarded as a free-fire zone in which
otherwise actionable verbal attacks are shielded from
liability. If the First Amendment permits the States to
protect their residents from the harm inflicted by such
attacks—and the Court does not hold otherwise—then the
location of the tort should not be dispositive. A physical
assault may occur without trespassing; it is no defense
that the perpetrator had “the right to be where [he was].”
See ante, at 11. And the same should be true with respect
to unprotected speech. Neither classic “fighting words”
nor defamatory statements are immunized when they
occur in a public place, and there is no good reason to treat
a verbal assault based on the conduct or character of a
private figure like Matthew Snyder any differently.
One final comment about the opinion of the Court is in
order. The Court suggests that the wounds inflicted by
vicious verbal assaults at funerals will be prevented or at
least mitigated in the future by new laws that restrict
picketing within a specified distance of a funeral. See
ante, at 10–11. It is apparent, however, that the enact
ment of these laws is no substitute for the protection
provided by the established IIED tort; according to the
Court, the verbal attacks that severely wounded petitioner
in this case complied with the new Maryland law regulat
ing funeral picketing. See ante, at 11, n. 5. And there is
absolutely nothing to suggest that Congress and the state
legislatures, in enacting these laws, intended them to
displace the protection provided by the well-established
IIED tort.
The real significance of these new laws is not that they
obviate the need for IIED protection. Rather, their enact
ment dramatically illustrates the fundamental point that
funerals are unique events at which special protection
against emotional assaults is in order. At funerals, the
emotional well-being of bereaved relatives is particularly

