Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

ALITO, J., dissenting

and the only question for the jury was whether the ele
ments of the IIED tort were met.
Third, the Court of Appeals appears to have concluded
that the First Amendment does not permit an IIED plain
tiff to recover for speech that cannot reasonably be inter
preted as stating actual facts about an individual. See id.,
at 222. In reaching this conclusion, the Court of Appeals
relied on two of our cases—Milkovich v. Lorain Journal
Co., 497 U. S. 1 (1990), and Hustler, 485 U. S. 46—but
neither supports the broad proposition that the Court of
Appeals adopted.
Milkovich was a defamation case, and falsity is an ele
ment of defamation. Nothing in Milkovich even hints that
the First Amendment requires that this defamation ele
ment be engrafted onto the IIED tort.
Hustler did involve an IIED claim, but the plaintiff
there was a public figure, and the Court did not suggest
that its holding would also apply in a case involving a
private figure. Nor did the Court suggest that its holding
applied across the board to all types of IIED claims. In
stead, the holding was limited to “publications such as the
one here at issue,” namely, a caricature in a magazine.
485 U. S., at 56. Unless a caricature of a public figure can
reasonably be interpreted as stating facts that may be
proved to be wrong, the caricature does not have the same
potential to wound as a personal verbal assault on a vul
nerable private figure.
Because I cannot agree either with the holding of this
Court or the other grounds on which the Court of Appeals
relied, I would reverse the decision below and remand for
further proceedings.17
——————
17 The Court affirms the decision of the Fourth Circuit with respect to
petitioner’s claim of intrusion upon seclusion on a ground not addressed
by the Fourth Circuit. I would not reach out to decide that issue but
would instead leave it for the Fourth Circuit to decide on remand. I
would likewise allow the Fourth Circuit on remand to decide whether

