12

SNYDER v. PHELPS
Opinion of the Court

said “God Bless America” and “God Loves You,” would not
have been subjected to liability. It was what Westboro
said that exposed it to tort damages.
Given that Westboro’s speech was at a public place on a
matter of public concern, that speech is entitled to “special
protection” under the First Amendment. Such speech
cannot be restricted simply because it is upsetting or
arouses contempt. “If there is a bedrock principle underly
ing the First Amendment, it is that the government may
not prohibit the expression of an idea simply because
society finds the idea itself offensive or disagreeable.”
Texas v. Johnson, 491 U. S. 397, 414 (1989). Indeed, “the
point of all speech protection . . . is to shield just those
choices of content that in someone’s eyes are misguided, or
even hurtful.” Hurley v. Irish-American Gay, Lesbian and
Bisexual Group of Boston, Inc., 515 U. S. 557, 574 (1995).
The jury here was instructed that it could hold Westboro
liable for intentional infliction of emotional distress based
on a finding that Westboro’s picketing was “outrageous.”
“Outrageousness,” however, is a highly malleable standard
with “an inherent subjectiveness about it which would
allow a jury to impose liability on the basis of the jurors’
tastes or views, or perhaps on the basis of their dislike of a
particular expression.” Hustler, 485 U. S., at 55 (internal
quotation marks omitted). In a case such as this, a jury is
“unlikely to be neutral with respect to the content of [the]
speech,” posing “a real danger of becoming an instrument
for the suppression of . . . ‘vehement, caustic, and some
times unpleasan[t]’ ” expression. Bose Corp., 466 U. S., at
510 (quoting New York Times, 376 U. S., at 270). Such a
risk is unacceptable; “in public debate [we] must tolerate
insulting, and even outrageous, speech in order to provide
adequate ‘breathing space’ to the freedoms protected by
the First Amendment.” Boos v. Barry, 485 U. S. 312, 322
(1988) (some internal quotation marks omitted). What
Westboro said, in the whole context of how and where it

