2

SNYDER v. PHELPS
Syllabus
ments were entitled to First Amendment protection because those
statements were on matters of public concern, were not provably
false, and were expressed solely through hyperbolic rhetoric.

Held: The First Amendment shields Westboro from tort liability for its
picketing in this case. Pp. 5–15.
(a) The Free Speech Clause of the First Amendment can serve as a
defense in state tort suits, including suits for intentional infliction of
emotional distress. Hustler Magazine, Inc. v. Falwell, 485 U. S. 46,
50-51. Whether the First Amendment prohibits holding Westboro li
able for its speech in this case turns largely on whether that speech is
of public or private concern, as determined by all the circumstances
of the case. “[S]peech on public issues occupies the ‘ “highest rung of
the hierarchy of First Amendment values” ’ and is entitled to special
protection.” Connick v. Myers, 461 U. S. 138, 145. Although the
boundaries of what constitutes speech on matters of public concern
are not well defined, this Court has said that speech is of public con
cern when it can “be fairly considered as relating to any matter of po
litical, social, or other concern to the community,” id., at 146, or when
it “is a subject of general interest and of value and concern to the
public,” San Diego v. Roe, 543 U. S. 77, 83–84. A statement’s argua
bly “inappropriate or controversial character . . . is irrelevant to the
question whether it deals with a matter of public concern.” Rankin v.
McPherson, 483 U. S. 378, 387. Pp. 5–7.
To determine whether speech is of public or private concern, this
Court must independently examine the “ ‘content, form, and con
text,’ ” of the speech “ ‘as revealed by the whole record.’ ” Dun &
Bradstreet, Inc. v. Greenmoss Builders, Inc., 472 U. S. 749, 761. In
considering content, form, and context, no factor is dispositive, and it
is necessary to evaluate all aspects of the speech. Pp. 7–8.
The “content” of Westboro’s signs plainly relates to public, rather
than private, matters. The placards highlighted issues of public im
port—the political and moral conduct of the United States and its
citizens, the fate of the Nation, homosexuality in the military, and
scandals involving the Catholic clergy—and Westboro conveyed its
views on those issues in a manner designed to reach as broad a public
audience as possible. Even if a few of the signs were viewed as con
taining messages related to a particular individual, that would not
change the fact that the dominant theme of Westboro’s demonstra
tion spoke to broader public issues. P. 8.
The “context” of the speech—its connection with Matthew Snyder’s
funeral—cannot by itself transform the nature of Westboro’s speech.
The signs reflected Westboro’s condemnation of much in modern soci
ety, and it cannot be argued that Westboro’s use of speech on public
issues was in any way contrived to insulate a personal attack on

