8

SNYDER v. PHELPS
ALITO, J., dissenting

Belying any suggestion that they had simply made general
comments about homosexuality, the Catholic Church, and
the United States military, the “epic” addressed the Sny
der family directly:
“God blessed you, Mr. and Mrs. Snyder, with a re
source and his name was Matthew. He was an arrow
in your quiver! In thanks to God for the comfort the
child could bring you, you had a DUTY to prepare that
child to serve the LORD his GOD—PERIOD! You did
JUST THE OPPOSITE—you raised him for the devil.
.
.
.
.
.
“Albert and Julie RIPPED that body apart and
taught Matthew to defy his Creator, to divorce, and to
commit adultery. They taught him how to support the
largest pedophile machine in the history of the entire
world, the Roman Catholic monstrosity. Every dime
they gave the Roman Catholic monster they con
demned their own souls. They also, in supporting sa
tanic Catholicism, taught Matthew to be an idolater.
.
.
.
.
.
“Then after all that they sent him to fight for the
United States of Sodom, a filthy country that is in lock
step with his evil, wicked, and sinful manner of life,
putting him in the cross hairs of a God that is so mad
——————
in Snyder’s petition for certiorari. Ante, at 3, n. 1. The epic, however, is
not a distinct claim but a piece of evidence that the jury considered in
imposing liability for the claims now before this Court. The protest and
the epic are parts of a single course of conduct that the jury found to
constitute intentional infliction of emotional distress. See 580 F. 3d,
at 225 (“[T]he Epic cannot be divorced from the general context of
the funeral protest”). The Court’s strange insistence that the epic “is
not properly before us,” ante, at 3, n. 1, means that the Court has not
actually made “an independent examination of the whole record,” ante,
at 7 (internal quotation marks omitted). And the Court’s refusal to
consider the epic contrasts sharply with its willingness to take notice of
Westboro’s protest activities at other times and locations. See ante,
at 9.

