10

SNYDER v. PHELPS
Opinion of the Court

because Westboro believes that God is killing American
soldiers as punishment for the Nation’s sinful policies.
Westboro’s choice to convey its views in conjunction with
Matthew Snyder’s funeral made the expression of those
views particularly hurtful to many, especially to Mat
thew’s father. The record makes clear that the applicable
legal term—“emotional distress”—fails to capture fully the
anguish Westboro’s choice added to Mr. Snyder’s already
incalculable grief. But Westboro conducted its picketing
peacefully on matters of public concern at a public place
adjacent to a public street. Such space occupies a “special
position in terms of First Amendment protection.” United
States v. Grace, 461 U. S. 171, 180 (1983). “[W]e have
repeatedly referred to public streets as the archetype of a
traditional public forum,” noting that “ ‘[t]ime out of mind’
public streets and sidewalks have been used for public
assembly and debate.” Frisby v. Schultz, 487 U. S. 474,
480 (1988).4
That said, “[e]ven protected speech is not equally per
missible in all places and at all times.” Id., at 479 (quot
ing Cornelius v. NAACP Legal Defense & Ed. Fund, Inc.,
473 U. S. 788, 799 (1985)). Westboro’s choice of where and
when to conduct its picketing is not beyond the Govern
ment’s regulatory reach—it is “subject to reasonable time,
place, or manner restrictions” that are consistent with the
standards announced in this Court’s precedents. Clark v.
Community for Creative Non-Violence, 468 U. S. 288, 293
(1984). Maryland now has a law imposing restrictions on
funeral picketing, Md. Crim. Law Code Ann. §10–205
——————
4 The

dissent is wrong to suggest that the Court considers a public
street “a free-fire zone in which otherwise actionable verbal attacks are
shielded from liability.” Post, at 10–11. The fact that Westboro con
ducted its picketing adjacent to a public street does not insulate the
speech from liability, but instead heightens concerns that what is at
issue is an effort to communicate to the public the church’s views on
matters of public concern. That is why our precedents so clearly
recognize the special significance of this traditional public forum.

