6

NURRE v. WHITEHEAD
ALITO, J., dissenting

graduation program). Banning speech because of the view
that the speech is likely to be perceived as expressing
seems to me to constitute viewpoint discrimination.
The decision below will have important implications for
the nearly 10 million public school students in the Ninth
Circuit. Even if the decision is read narrowly, it will
restrict what is purportedly personal student expression
at public school graduation ceremonies. And as Judge
Smith noted, the Ninth Circuit’s reasoning may be applied
to almost all public school artistic performances. 580
F. 3d, at 1099 (opinion dissenting in part and concurring
in judgment). The audience at such events, which gener­
ally consists overwhelmingly of relatives and friends of the
performers, may be regarded as no less “captive” than
graduation attendees. If the decision is applied to such
performances, school administrators in some communities
may choose to avoid “controversy” by banishing all musical
pieces with “religious connotations.” Id., at 1095, 1091
(majority opinion).
The logic of the Ninth Circuit’s decision has even
broader implications. Why, for example, should the Ninth
Circuit’s reasoning apply only to musical performances
and not to other forms of student expression, including
student speeches at graduation ceremonies and other
comparable school events? Moreover, unless discrimina­
tion against speech expressing a religious viewpoint is less
objectionable than other forms of viewpoint discrimina­
tion, the Ninth Circuit’s decision may provide the basis for
wide-ranging censorship of student speech that expresses
controversial ideas. A reasonable reading of the Ninth
Circuit’s decision is that it authorizes school administra­
tors to ban any controversial student expression at any
school event attended by parents and others who feel
obligated to be present because of the importance of the
event for the participating students. A decision with such
potentially broad and troubling implications merits our
review.

