Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

ALITO, J., dissenting

trict’s decision, the members of the wind ensemble “reluc­
tantly elected to perform the fourth movement of Gustav
Holst’s ‘Second Suite in F for Military Band.’ ” Ibid.
Petitioner then brought this action against the school
superintendent in her official and individual capacities,
claiming, among other things, that the district’s decision
had violated her right to freedom of speech. The District
Court granted summary judgment for the superintendent,
and a divided panel of the Ninth Circuit affirmed. 580
F. 3d 1087. The majority acknowledged that the perform­
ance of “an entirely instrumental” musical piece “is speech
as contemplated by the First Amendment,” and assumed,
as the school district had conceded, that the school had
created a “ ‘limited public forum’ ” when it allowed the
members of the wind ensemble to choose the piece that
they wished to play. Id., at 1093–1094. Nevertheless, the
majority held that the vetoing of the ensemble members’
selection had not violated their free speech rights because
“it is reasonable for a school official to prohibit the per­
formance of an obviously religious piece” “when there is a
captive audience at a graduation ceremony, which spans a
finite amount of time, and during which the demand for
equal time is so great that comparable non-religious musi­
cal works might not be presented.” Id., at 1095. Dissent­
ing on the free speech issue, Judge Smith expressed con­
cern that the panel’s decision would encourage public
school administrators to ban “musical and artistic presen­
tations by their students in school-sponsored limited
public fora where those presentations contain any trace of
religious inspiration, for fear of criticism by a member of
the public, however extreme that person’s views may be.”
Id., at 1099.
——————
(1989), http://trnmusic.com/pdfs/scorepdfs/onahymnsongofphilipbliss.pdf (as
visited Mar. 19, 2010, and available in Clerk of Court’s case file); see
also R. Garofalo, On a Hymnsong of Philip Bliss: A Teaching/Learning
Unit 9 (2000). Whatever distinction the district perceived between this
piece and Biebl’s “Ave Maria” is not revealed by the record.

