Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

ALITO, J., dissenting

503, 508–509 (1969).
In this case, however, the Court of Appeals held that a
public school did not violate the free speech rights of a
student when the school, after creating a limited public
forum, banned the performance of “an obviously religious
piece” because the piece might offend some members of the
“captive audience at a graduation ceremony.” 580 F. 3d,
at 1095. The tension between this reasoning and the
fundamental free speech principles noted above is unmis­
takable.
The Court of Appeals, in a footnote, acknowledged that
the district’s decision would have been impermissible if it
had constituted viewpoint discrimination, but the court
concluded that “this is not a case involving viewpoint
discrimination” because petitioner “concede[d] that she
was not attempting to express any specific religious view­
point” but instead “sought only to ‘play a pretty piece.’ ”
Id., at 1095, n. 6. This reasoning is questionable at best.
First, the Court of Appeals’ holding, as set out in the
body of its opinion, does not appear to depend in any way
on petitioner’s motivation in helping to select the Biebl
piece. The Court phrased its holding as follows: “[T]he
District’s action in keeping all musical performances at
graduation ‘entirely secular’ in nature was reasonable in
light of the circumstances surrounding a high school
graduation.” Id., at 1095. Nothing in the body of the
court’s opinion suggests that its decision would have come
out the other way if petitioner had favored the Biebl piece
for religious rather than artistic reasons. Second, the
school district did not veto the Biebl piece on viewpoint­
neutral grounds. On the contrary, the district banned that
piece precisely because of its perceived religious mes­
sage—that is, because the district feared that members of
the audience would view the performance of the piece as
the district’s sponsorship of a religious message. See Pet.
for Cert. 7 (quoting letter to the editor criticizing 2005

