2

NURRE v. WHITEHEAD
ALITO, J., dissenting

ously performed and that “they believed showcased their
talent and the culmination of their instrumental work.”
580 F. 3d 1087, 1091 (CA9 2009). At the prior year’s
graduation ceremony, the student choir had performed
“ ‘Up Above My Head,’ a vocal piece which included ex­
press references to ‘God,’ ‘heaven,’ and ‘angels,’ ” and the
school district claimed that this had resulted in “com­
plaints from graduation attendees” and at least one angry
letter to the editor of a local newspaper. Ibid.; id., at 1101
(M. Smith, J., dissenting in part and concurring in judg­
ment) (quoting lyrics); see also Brief in Opposition 7, and
n. 28. Fearful that the performance of Biebl’s “Ave Maria”
would cause a similar reaction, even though the perform­
ance would not include the lyrics of the piece, school dis­
trict officials vetoed the ensemble members’ choice “be­
cause the title and meaning of the piece had religious
connotations—and would be easily identified as such by
attendees merely by the title alone.” 580 F. 3d, at 1091.
The associate superintendent sent an e-mail to all the
principals in the district instructing them that “musical
selections for all graduations within the District should be
purely secular in nature.”2 Ibid. As a result of the dis­
——————
from the Hill: A History of the Cornell University Glee Club 174 (1998),
is relatively obscure.
2It is not clear that this e-mail accurately reflected either the dis­
trict’s past or then-current practice. According to the brief in opposi­
tion, the district approved the piece that the wind ensemble played at
graduation prior to 2006, “ ‘On a Hymnsong of Philip Bliss.’ ” See Brief
in Opposition 8; see also 580 F. 3d, at 1091. This song, which not only
includes the term “hymn” in its title, is an arrangement of Philip Bliss’
hymn “It is Well with My Soul” that has fervently religious lyrics,
including the following:
“Though Satan should buffet, though trials should come, 

Let this blest assurance control, 

That Christ hath regarded my helpless estate, 

And hath shed His own blood for my soul.”

Spafford and Bliss, It is Well with My Soul, in Gospel Hymns No. 2, p.

78 (P. Bliss & I. Sankey 1876); D. Holsinger, On a Hymnsong of Philip Bliss


