Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

1

BREYER, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 09–11328
_________________

WILLIE GENE DAVIS, PETITIONER v. UNITED 

STATES 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE ELEVENTH CIRCUIT

[June 16, 2011] 


JUSTICE BREYER, with whom JUSTICE GINSBURG joins,
dissenting.
In 2009, in Arizona v. Gant, 556 U. S. ___, this Court
held that a police search of an automobile without a war
rant violates the Fourth Amendment if the police have pre
viously removed the automobile’s occupants and placed
them securely in a squad car. The present case involves
these same circumstances, and it was pending on appeal
when this Court decided Gant. Because Gant represents a
“shift” in the Court’s Fourth Amendment jurisprudence,
ante, at 1, we must decide whether and how Gant’s new
rule applies here.
I
I agree with the Court about whether Gant’s new rule
applies. It does apply. Between 1965, when the Court
decided Linkletter v. Walker, 381 U. S. 618, and 1987,
when it decided Griffith v. Kentucky, 479 U. S. 314, that
conclusion would have been more difficult to reach. Under
Linkletter, the Court determined a new rule’s retroactivity
by looking to several different factors, including whether
the new rule represented a “clear break” with the past and
the degree of “reliance by law enforcement authorities on
the old standards.” Desist v. United States, 394 U. S. 244,
248–249 (1969) (internal quotation marks omitted) (also


2

DAVIS v. UNITED STATES
BREYER, J., dissenting

citing “the purpose to be served by the new standards”
and “the effect on the administration of justice” as factors
(internal quotation marks omitted)). And the Court would
often not apply the new rule to identical cases still pend
ing on appeal. See ibid.
After 22 years of struggling with its Linkletter approach,
however, the Court decided in Griffith that Linkletter
had proved unfair and unworkable. It then substituted a
clearer approach, stating that “a new rule for the conduct
of criminal prosecutions is to be applied retroactively to all
cases, state or federal, pending on direct review or not yet
final, with no exception for cases in which the new rule
constitutes a ‘clear break’ with the past.” 479 U. S., at
328. The Court today, following Griffith, concludes that
Gant’s new rule applies here. And to that extent I agree
with its decision.
II
The Court goes on, however, to decide how Gant’s new
rule will apply. And here it adds a fatal twist. While
conceding that, like the search in Gant, this search vio
lated the Fourth Amendment, it holds that, unlike Gant,
this defendant is not entitled to a remedy. That is be
cause the Court finds a new “good faith” exception which
prevents application of the normal remedy for a Fourth
Amendment violation, namely, suppression of the illegally
seized evidence. Weeks v. United States, 232 U. S. 383
(1914); Mapp v. Ohio, 367 U. S. 643 (1961). Leaving Davis
with a right but not a remedy, the Court “keep[s] the word
of promise to our ear” but “break[s] it to our hope.”
A
At this point I can no longer agree with the Court. A
new “good faith” exception and this Court’s retroactivity
decisions are incompatible. For one thing, the Court’s
distinction between (1) retroactive application of a new


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

BREYER, J., dissenting

rule and (2) availability of a remedy is highly artificial and
runs counter to precedent. To determine that a new rule
is retroactive is to determine that, at least in the normal
case, there is a remedy. As we have previously said, the
“source of a ‘new rule’ is the Constitution itself, not any
judicial power to create new rules of law”; hence, “[w]hat
we are actually determining when we assess the ‘retroac
tivity’ of a new rule is not the temporal scope of a newly
announced right, but whether a violation of the right that
occurred prior to the announcement of the new rule will
entitle a criminal defendant to the relief sought.” Dan
forth v. Minnesota, 552 U. S. 264, 271 (2008). The Court’s
“good faith” exception (unlike, say, inevitable discovery, a
remedial doctrine that applies only upon occasion) creates
“a categorical bar to obtaining redress” in every case pend
ing when a precedent is overturned. Ante, at 13–14.
For another thing, the Court’s holding re-creates the
very problems that led the Court to abandon Linkletter’s
approach to retroactivity in favor of Griffith’s. One such
problem concerns workability. The Court says that its
exception applies where there is “objectively reasonable”
police “reliance on binding appellate precedent.” Ante, at
1, 19. But to apply the term “binding appellate precedent”
often requires resolution of complex questions of degree.
Davis conceded that he faced binding anti-Gant precedent
in the Eleventh Circuit. But future litigants will be less
forthcoming. Ante, at 18. Indeed, those litigants will now
have to create distinctions to show that previous Circuit
precedent was not “binding” lest they find relief foreclosed
even if they win their constitutional claim.
At the same time, Fourth Amendment precedents fre
quently require courts to “slosh” their “way through the
factbound morass of ‘reasonableness.’ ” Scott v. Harris,
550 U. S. 372, 383 (2007). Suppose an officer’s conduct is
consistent with the language of a Fourth Amendment rule
that a court of appeals announced in a case with clearly


4

DAVIS v. UNITED STATES
BREYER, J., dissenting

distinguishable facts? Suppose the case creating the rele
vant precedent did not directly announce any general
rule but involved highly analogous facts? What about a
rule that all other jurisdictions, but not the defendant’s
jurisdiction, had previously accepted? What rules can be
developed for determining when, where, and how these
different kinds of precedents do, or do not, count as rele
vant “binding precedent”? The Linkletter-like result is
likely complex legal argument and police force confusion.
See Williams v. United States, 401 U. S. 646, 676 (1971)
(opinion of Harlan, J.) (describing trying to follow Linklet
ter decisions as “almost as difficult” as trying to follow “the
tracks made by a beast of prey in search of its intended
victim”).
Another such problem concerns fairness. Today’s hold
ing, like that in Linkletter, “violates basic norms of con
stitutional adjudication.” Griffith, supra, at 322. It treats
the defendant in a case announcing a new rule one way
while treating similarly situated defendants whose cases
are pending on appeal in a different way. See ante, at 18–
19. Justice Harlan explained why this approach is wrong
when he said:
“We cannot release criminals from jail merely because
we think one case is a particularly appropriate one [to
announce a constitutional doctrine] . . . . Simply fish
ing one case from the stream of appellate review, us
ing it as a vehicle for pronouncing new constitutional
standards, and then permitting a stream of similar
cases subsequently to flow by unaffected by that new
rule constitute an indefensible departure from [our
ordinary] model of judicial review.” Williams, supra,
at 679.
And in Griffith, the Court “embraced to a significant ex
tent the comprehensive analysis presented by Justice
Harlan.” 479 U. S., at 322.


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

BREYER, J., dissenting

Of course, the Court may, as it suggests, avoid this un
fairness by refusing to apply the exclusionary rule even
to the defendant in the very case in which it announces a
“new rule.” But that approach would make matters worse.
What would then happen in the lower courts? How would
courts of appeals, for example, come to reconsider their
prior decisions when other circuits’ cases lead them to
believe those decisions may be wrong? Why would a de
fendant seek to overturn any such decision? After all, if
the (incorrect) circuit precedent is clear, then even if
the defendant wins (on the constitutional question), he
loses (on relief). See Stovall v. Denno, 388 U. S. 293, 301
(1967). To what extent then could this Court rely upon
lower courts to work out Fourth Amendment differences
among themselves—through circuit reconsideration of a
precedent that other circuits have criticized? See Arizona v. Evans, 514 U. S. 1, 23, n. 1 (1995) (GINSBURG, J.,
dissenting).
B
Perhaps more important, the Court’s rationale for creat
ing its new “good faith” exception threatens to undermine
well-settled Fourth Amendment law. The Court correctly
says that pre-Gant Eleventh Circuit precedent had held
that a Gant-type search was constitutional; hence the
police conduct in this case, consistent with that precedent,
was “innocent.” Ante, at 10. But the Court then finds this
fact sufficient to create a new “good faith” exception to the
exclusionary rule. It reasons that the “sole purpose” of the
exclusionary rule “is to deter future Fourth Amendment
violations,” ante, at 6. The “deterrence benefits of exclu
sion vary with the culpability of the law enforcement
conduct at issue,” ante, at 8 (internal quotation marks and
brackets omitted). Those benefits are sufficient to jus
tify exclusion where “police exhibit deliberate, reckless,
or grossly negligent disregard for Fourth Amendment


6

DAVIS v. UNITED STATES
BREYER, J., dissenting

rights,” ibid. (internal quotation marks omitted). But
those benefits do not justify exclusion where, as here, the
police act with “simple, isolated negligence” or an “objec
tively reasonable good-faith belief that their conduct is
lawful,” ibid. (internal quotation marks omitted).
If the Court means what it says, what will happen to the
exclusionary rule, a rule that the Court adopted nearly a
century ago for federal courts, Weeks v. United States, 232
U. S. 383, and made applicable to state courts a half cen
tury ago through the Fourteenth Amendment, Mapp v.
Ohio, 367 U. S. 643? The Court has thought of that rule
not as punishment for the individual officer or as repara
tion for the individual defendant but more generally as
an effective way to secure enforcement of the Fourth
Amendment’s commands. Weeks, supra, at 393 (without
the exclusionary rule, the Fourth Amendment would be “of
no value,” and “might as well be stricken from the Consti
tution”). This Court has deviated from the “suppression”
norm in the name of “good faith” only a handful of times
and in limited, atypical circumstances: where a magistrate
has erroneously issued a warrant, United States v. Leon,
468 U. S. 897 (1984); where a database has erroneously
informed police that they have a warrant, Arizona v.
Evans, 514 U. S. 1 (1995), Herring v. United States, 555
U. S. 135 (2009); and where an unconstitutional statute
purported to authorize the search, Illinois v. Krull, 480
U. S. 340 (1987). See Herring, supra, at 142 (“good faith”
exception inaptly named).
The fact that such exceptions are few and far between is
understandable. Defendants frequently move to suppress
evidence on Fourth Amendment grounds. In many, per
haps most, of these instances the police, uncertain of how
the Fourth Amendment applied to the particular factual
circumstances they faced, will have acted in objective good
faith. Yet, in a significant percentage of these instances,
courts will find that the police were wrong. And, unless


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

BREYER, J., dissenting

the police conduct falls into one of the exceptions previ
ously noted, courts have required the suppression of the
evidence seized. 1 W. LaFave, Search and Seizure §1.3,
pp. 103–104 (4th ed. 2004) (“good faith” exception has not
yet been applied to warrantless searches and seizures
beyond the “rather special situations” of Evans, Herring,
and Krull). See Valdes, Frequency and Success: An Em
pirical Study of Criminal Law Defenses, Federal Constitu
tional Evidentiary Claims, and Plea Negotiations, 153
U. Pa. L. Rev. 1709, 1728 (2005) (suppression motions are
filed in approximately 7% of criminal cases; approximately
12% of suppression motions are successful); LaFave, su
pra, at 64 (“Surely many more Fourth Amendment viola
tions result from carelessness than from intentional con
stitutional violations”); Stewart, The Road to Mapp v.
Ohio and Beyond: The Origins, Development and Future
of the Exclusionary Rule in Search-and-Seizure Cases, 83
Colum. L. Rev. 1365, 1389 (1983) (“[T]he vast majority of
fourth amendment violations . . . [are] motivated by com
mendable zeal, not condemnable malice”).
But an officer who conducts a search that he believes
complies with the Constitution but which, it ultimately
turns out, falls just outside the Fourth Amendment’s
bounds is no more culpable than an officer who follows
erroneous “binding precedent.” Nor is an officer more
culpable where circuit precedent is simply suggestive
rather than “binding,” where it only describes how to treat
roughly analogous instances, or where it just does not
exist. Thus, if the Court means what it now says, if it
would place determinative weight upon the culpability of
an individual officer’s conduct, and if it would apply the
exclusionary rule only where a Fourth Amendment viola
tion was “deliberate, reckless, or grossly negligent,” then
the “good faith” exception will swallow the exclusionary
rule. Indeed, our broad dicta in Herring—dicta the Court
repeats and expands upon today—may already be leading


8

DAVIS v. UNITED STATES
BREYER, J., dissenting

lower courts in this direction. See United States v. Julius,
610 F. 3d 60, 66–67 (CA2 2010) (assuming warrantless
search was unconstitutional and remanding for District
Court to “perform the cost/benefit analysis required by
Herring” and to consider “whether the degree of police
culpability in this case rose beyond mere . . . negligence”
before ordering suppression); United States v. Master, 614
F. 3d 236, 243 (CA6 2010) (“[T]he Herring Court’s empha
sis seems weighed more toward preserving evidence for
use in obtaining convictions, even if illegally seized . . .
unless the officers engage in ‘deliberate, reckless, or
grossly negligent conduct’ ” (quoting Herring, supra, at
144)). Today’s decision will doubtless accelerate this
trend.
Any such change (which may already be underway)
would affect not “an exceedingly small set of cases,” ante,
at 18, but a very large number of cases, potentially many
thousands each year. See Valdes, supra, at 1728. And
since the exclusionary rule is often the only sanction avail
able for a Fourth Amendment violation, the Fourth
Amendment would no longer protect ordinary Americans
from “unreasonable searches and seizures.” See Wolf v.
Colorado, 338 U. S. 25, 41 (1949) (Murphy, J., dissenting)
(overruled by Mapp v. Ohio, 367 U. S. 643 (1961)) (In
many circumstances, “there is but one alternative to the
rule of exclusion. That is no sanction at all”); Herring,
supra, at 152 (GINSBURG, J., dissenting) (the exclusionary
rule is “an essential auxiliary” to the Fourth Amendment).
It would become a watered-down Fourth Amendment,
offering its protection against only those searches and sei
zures that are egregiously unreasonable.
III
In sum, I fear that the Court’s opinion will undermine
the exclusionary rule. And I believe that the Court
wrongly departs from Griffith regardless. Instead I would


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

BREYER, J., dissenting

follow Griffith, apply Gant’s rule retroactively to this
case, and require suppression of the evidence. Such an ap
proach is consistent with our precedent, and it would
indeed affect no more than “an exceedingly small set of
cases.” Ante, at 18.
For these reasons, with respect, I dissent.

