Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

Opinion of the Court
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Wash
ington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 08–970
_________________

SONNY PERDUE, GOVERNOR OF GEORGIA, ET AL., 

PETITIONERS v. KENNY A., BY HIS NEXT FRIEND

LINDA WINN, ET AL. 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF

APPEALS FOR THE ELEVENTH CIRCUIT

[April 21, 2010] 


JUSTICE ALITO delivered the opinion of the Court.
This case presents the question whether the calculation
of an attorney’s fee, under federal fee-shifting statutes,
based on the “lodestar,” i.e., the number of hours worked
multiplied by the prevailing hourly rates, may be in
creased due to superior performance and results.1 We
have stated in previous cases that such an increase is
permitted in extraordinary circumstances, and we reaf
firm that rule. But as we have also said in prior cases,
there is a strong presumption that the lodestar is suffi
cient; factors subsumed in the lodestar calculation cannot
be used as a ground for increasing an award above the
lodestar; and a party seeking fees has the burden of identi
fying a factor that the lodestar does not adequately take
——————
1 JUSTICE BREYER would have us answer this question “Yes” and then
end the opinion. See post, at 2 (opinion concurring in part and dissent
ing in part). Such an opinion would be of little use to the bench or bar
and would pointlessly invite an additional round of litigation. The
issue of the standards to be applied in granting an enhancement is
fairly subsumed within the question that we agreed to decide and has
been extensively discussed in the briefs filed in this case.


2

PERDUE v. KENNY A.
Opinion of the Court

into account and proving with specificity that an enhanced
fee is justified. Because the District Court did not apply
these standards, we reverse the decision below and re
mand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
I

A

Respondents (plaintiffs below) are children in the Geor
gia foster-care system and their next friends. They filed
this class action on behalf of 3,000 children in foster care
and named as defendants the Governor of Georgia and
various state officials (petitioners in this case). Claiming
that deficiencies in the foster-care system in two counties
near Atlanta violated their federal and state constitutional
and statutory rights, respondents sought injunctive and
declaratory relief, as well as attorney’s fees and expenses.
The United States District Court for the Northern Dis
trict of Georgia eventually referred the case to mediation,
where the parties entered into a consent decree, which the
District Court approved. The consent decree resolved all
pending issues other than the fees that respondents’ at
torneys were entitled to receive under 42 U. S. C. §1988.2
B
Respondents submitted a request for more than $14
million in attorney’s fees. Half of that amount was based
on their calculation of the lodestar—roughly 30,000 hours
multiplied by hourly rates of $200 to $495 for attorneys
and $75 to $150 for non-attorneys. In support of their fee
——————
2 Title

42 U. S. C. §1988(b) provides:
“In any action or proceeding to enforce a provision of sections 1981,
1981a, 1982, 1983, 1985, and 1986 of this title, title IX of Public Law
92–318, the Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1993, the Religious
Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act of 2000, title VI of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964, or section 13981 of this title, the court, in its discre
tion, may allow the prevailing party, other than the United States, a
reasonable attorney’s fee as part of the costs . . . . ” (Citations omitted.)


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of the Court

request, respondents submitted affidavits asserting that
these rates were within the range of prevailing market
rates for legal services in the relevant market.
The other half of the amount that respondents sought
represented a fee enhancement for superior work and
results. Affidavits submitted in support of this request
claimed that the lodestar amount “would be generally
insufficient to induce lawyers of comparable skill, judg
ment, professional representation and experience” to
litigate this case. See, e.g., App. 80. Petitioners objected
to the fee request, contending that some of the proposed
hourly rates were too high, that the hours claimed were
excessive, and that the enhancement would duplicate
factors that were reflected in the lodestar amount.
The District Court awarded fees of approximately
$10.5 million. See 454 F. Supp. 2d 1260, 1296 (ND Ga.
2006). The District Court found that the hourly rates
proposed by respondents were “fair and reasonable,” id., at
1285, but that some of the entries on counsel’s billing
records were vague and that the hours claimed for many of
the billing categories were excessive. The court therefore
cut the non-travel hours by 15% and halved the hourly
rate for travel hours. This resulted in a lodestar calcula
tion of approximately $6 million.
The court then enhanced this award by 75%, concluding
that the lodestar calculation did not take into account “(1)
the fact that class counsel were required to advance case
expenses of $1.7 million over a three-year period with no
on[-]going reimbursement, (2) the fact that class counsel
were not paid on an on-going basis as the work was being
performed, and (3) the fact that class counsel’s ability to
recover a fee and expense reimbursement were completely
contingent on the outcome of the case.” Id., at 1288. The
court stated that respondents’ attorneys had exhibited “a
higher degree of skill, commitment, dedication, and pro
fessionalism . . . than the Court has seen displayed by the


4

PERDUE v. KENNY A.
Opinion of the Court

attorneys in any other case during its 27 years on the
bench.” Id., at 1289. The court also commented that the
results obtained were “ ‘extraordinary’ ” and added that
“[a]fter 58 years as a practicing attorney and federal
judge, the Court is unaware of any other case in which a
plaintiff class has achieved such a favorable result on such
a comprehensive scale.” Id., at 1290. The enhancement
resulted in an additional $4.5 million fee award.
Relying on prior Circuit precedent, a panel of the Elev
enth Circuit affirmed. 532 F. 3d 1209 (2008). The panel
held that the District Court had not abused its discretion
by failing to make a larger reduction in the number of
hours for which respondents’ attorneys sought reim
bursement, but the panel commented that it “would have
cut the billable hours more if we were deciding the matter
in the first instance” and added that the hourly rates
approved by the District Court also “appear[ed] to be on
the generous side.” Id., at 1220, and n. 2. On the question
of the enhancement, however, the panel splintered, with
each judge writing a separate opinion.
Judge Carnes concluded that binding Eleventh Circuit
precedent required that the decision of the District Court
be affirmed, but he opined that the reasoning in our opin
ions suggested that no enhancement should be allowed in
this case. He concluded that the quality of the attorneys’
performance was “adequately accounted for ‘either in
determining the reasonable number of hours expended on
the litigation or in setting the reasonable hourly rates.’ ”
Id., at 1225 (quoting Pennsylvania v. Delaware Valley
Citizens’ Council for Clean Air, 478 U. S. 546, 565–566
(1986) (Delaware Valley I)). He found that an enhance
ment could not be justified based on delay in the recovery
of attorney’s fees and reimbursable expenses because such
delay is a routine feature of cases brought under 42
U. S. C. §1983. And he reasoned that the District Court
had contravened our holding in Burlington v. Dague, 505


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of the Court

U. S. 557 (1992), when it relied on “ ‘the fact that class
counsel’s compensation was totally contingent upon pre
vailing in this action.’ ” 532 F. 3d, at 1226, 1228 (quoting
affidavit in support of fee request).
Judge Wilson concurred in the judgment but disagreed
with Judge Carnes’ view that Eleventh Circuit precedent
is inconsistent with our decisions. Judge Hill also con
curred in the judgment but expressed no view about the
correctness of the prior Circuit precedent.
The Eleventh Circuit denied rehearing en banc over the
dissent of three judges. See 547 F. 3d 1319 (2008). Judge
Wilson filed an opinion concurring in the denial of rehear
ing; Judge Carnes, joined by Judges Tjoflat and Dubina,
filed an opinion dissenting from the denial of rehearing;
and Judge Tjoflat filed a separate dissent, contending,
among other things, that the District Court, by basing the
enhancement in large part on a comparison of the per
formance of respondents’ attorneys with all of the un
named attorneys whose work he had observed during his
professional career, had improperly rendered a decision
that was effectively unreviewable on appeal and had
essentially served as a witness in support of the enhance
ment. Id., at 1326–1327.
We granted certiorari. 556 U. S. ___ (2009).
II
The general rule in our legal system is that each party
must pay its own attorney’s fees and expenses, see Hensley
v. Eckerhart, 461 U. S. 424, 429 (1983), but Congress
enacted 42 U. S. C. §1988 in order to ensure that federal
rights are adequately enforced. Section 1988 provides that
a prevailing party in certain civil rights actions may re
cover “a reasonable attorney’s fee as part of the costs.”3
——————
3 Virtually identical language appears in many of the federal fee
shifting statutes. See Burlington v. Dague, 505 U. S. 557, 562 (1992).


6

PERDUE v. KENNY A.
Opinion of the Court

Unfortunately, the statute does not explain what Congress
meant by a “reasonable” fee, and therefore the task of
identifying an appropriate methodology for determining a
“reasonable” fee was left for the courts.
One possible method was set out in Johnson v. Georgia
Highway Express, Inc., 488 F. 2d 714, 717–719 (CA5
1974), which listed 12 factors that a court should consider
in determining a reasonable fee.4 This method, however,
“gave very little actual guidance to district courts. Setting
attorney’s fees by reference to a series of sometimes sub
jective factors placed unlimited discretion in trial judges
and produced disparate results.” Delaware Valley I,
supra, at 563.
An alternative, the lodestar approach, was pioneered by
the Third Circuit in Lindy Bros. Builders, Inc. of Philadel
phia v. American Radiator & Standard Sanitary Corp.,
487 F. 2d 161 (1973), appeal after remand, 540 F. 2d 102
(1976), and “achieved dominance in the federal courts”
after our decision in Hensley. Gisbrecht v. Barnhart, 535
U. S. 789, 801 (2002). “Since that time, ‘[t]he “lodestar”
figure has, as its name suggests, become the guiding light
of our fee-shifting jurisprudence.’ ” Ibid. (quoting Dague,
supra, at 562).
Although the lodestar method is not perfect, it has
several important virtues. First, in accordance with our
understanding of the aim of fee-shifting statutes, the
lodestar looks to “the prevailing market rates in the rele
——————
4 These factors were: “(1) the time and labor required; (2) the novelty
and difficulty of the questions; (3) the skill requisite to perform the
legal service properly; (4) the preclusion of employment by the attorney
due to the acceptance of the case; (5) the customary fee; (6) whether the
fee is fixed or contingent; (7) time limitations imposed by the client or
the circumstances; (8) the amount involved and the results obtained; (9)
the experience, reputation, and ability of the attorneys; (10) the ‘unde
sirability’ of the case; (11) the nature and length of the professional
relationship with the client; and (12) awards in similar cases.” Hensley
v. Eckerhart, 461 U. S. 424, 430, n. 3 (1983).


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of the Court

vant community.” Blum v. Stenson, 465 U. S. 886, 895
(1984). Developed after the practice of hourly billing had
become widespread, see Gisbrecht, supra, at 801, the
lodestar method produces an award that roughly approxi
mates the fee that the prevailing attorney would have
received if he or she had been representing a paying client
who was billed by the hour in a comparable case. Second,
the lodestar method is readily administrable, see Dague,
505 U. S., at 566; see also Buckhannon Board & Care
Home, Inc. v. West Virginia Dept. of Health and Human
Resources, 532 U. S. 598, 609 (2001); and unlike the John
son approach, the lodestar calculation is “objective,”
Hensley, supra, at 433, and thus cabins the discretion of
trial judges, permits meaningful judicial review, and
produces reasonably predictable results.
III
Our prior decisions concerning the federal fee-shifting
statutes have established six important rules that lead to
our decision in this case.
First, a “reasonable” fee is a fee that is sufficient to
induce a capable attorney to undertake the representation
of a meritorious civil rights case. See Delaware Valley I,
478 U. S., at 565 (“[I]f plaintiffs . . . find it possible to
engage a lawyer based on the statutory assurance that he
will be paid a ‘reasonable fee,’ the purpose behind the fee
shifting statute has been satisfied”); Blum, supra, at 897
(“[A] reasonable attorney’s fee is one that is adequate to
attract competent counsel, but that does not produce
windfalls to attorneys” (ellipsis, brackets, and internal
quotation marks omitted)). Section 1988’s aim is to en
force the covered civil rights statutes, not to provide “a
form of economic relief to improve the financial lot of
attorneys.” Delaware Valley I, supra, at 565.
Second, the lodestar method yields a fee that is pre
sumptively sufficient to achieve this objective. See Dague,


8

PERDUE v. KENNY A.
Opinion of the Court

supra, at 562; Delaware Valley I, supra, at 565; Blum,
supra, at 897; see also Gisbrecht, supra, at 801–802.
Indeed, we have said that the presumption is a “strong”
one. Dague, supra, at 562; Delaware Valley I, supra, at
565.
Third, although we have never sustained an enhance
ment of a lodestar amount for performance, see Brief for
United States as Amicus Curiae 12, 17, we have repeat
edly said that enhancements may be awarded in “ ‘rare’ ”
and “ ‘exceptional’ ” circumstances. Delaware Valley I,
supra, at 565; Blum, supra, at 897; Hensley, 461 U. S., at
435.
Fourth, we have noted that “the lodestar figure includes
most, if not all, of the relevant factors constituting a ‘rea
sonable’ attorney’s fee,” Delaware Valley I, supra, at 566,
and have held that an enhancement may not be awarded
based on a factor that is subsumed in the lodestar calcula
tion, see Dague, supra, at 562–563; Pennsylvania v. Dela
ware Valley Citizens’ Council for Clean Air, 483 U. S. 711,
726–727 (1987) (Delaware Valley II) (plurality opinion);
Blum, 465 U. S., at 898. We have thus held that the nov
elty and complexity of a case generally may not be used as
a ground for an enhancement because these factors “pre
sumably [are] fully reflected in the number of billable
hours recorded by counsel.” Ibid. We have also held that
the quality of an attorney’s performance generally should
not be used to adjust the lodestar “[b]ecause considera
tions concerning the quality of a prevailing party’s coun
sel’s representation normally are reflected in the reason
able hourly rate.” Delaware Valley I, supra, at 566.
Fifth, the burden of proving that an enhancement is
necessary must be borne by the fee applicant. Dague,
supra, at 561; Blum, 465 U. S., at 901–902.
Finally, a fee applicant seeking an enhancement must
produce “specific evidence” that supports the award. Id.,
at 899, 901 (An enhancement must be based on “evidence


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of the Court

that enhancement was necessary to provide fair and rea
sonable compensation”). This requirement is essential if
the lodestar method is to realize one of its chief virtues,
i.e., providing a calculation that is objective and capable of
being reviewed on appeal.
IV 

A

In light of what we have said in prior cases, we reject
any contention that a fee determined by the lodestar
method may not be enhanced in any situation. The lode
star method was never intended to be conclusive in all
circumstances. Instead, there is a “strong presumption”
that the lodestar figure is reasonable, but that presump
tion may be overcome in those rare circumstances in
which the lodestar does not adequately take into account a
factor that may properly be considered in determining a
reasonable fee.
B
In this case, we are asked to decide whether either the
quality of an attorney’s performance or the results ob
tained are factors that may properly provide a basis for an
enhancement. We treat these two factors as one. When a
plaintiff’s attorney achieves results that are more favor
able than would have been predicted based on the govern
ing law and the available evidence, the outcome may be
attributable to superior performance and commitment of
resources by plaintiff’s counsel. Or the outcome may
result from inferior performance by defense counsel, unan
ticipated defense concessions, unexpectedly favorable
rulings by the court, an unexpectedly sympathetic jury, or
simple luck. Since none of these latter causes can justify
an enhanced award, superior results are relevant only to
the extent it can be shown that they are the result of
superior attorney performance. Thus, we need only con


10

PERDUE v. KENNY A.
Opinion of the Court

sider whether superior attorney performance can justify
an enhancement. And in light of the principles derived
from our prior cases, we inquire whether there are circum
stances in which superior attorney performance is not
adequately taken into account in the lodestar calculation.
We conclude that there are a few such circumstances but
that these circumstances are indeed “rare” and “excep
tional,” and require specific evidence that the lodestar
fee would not have been “adequate to attract competent
counsel,” Blum, supra, at 897 (internal quotation marks
omitted).
First, an enhancement may be appropriate where the
method used in determining the hourly rate employed in
the lodestar calculation does not adequately measure the
attorney’s true market value, as demonstrated in part
during the litigation.5 This may occur if the hourly rate is
determined by a formula that takes into account only a
single factor (such as years since admission to the bar)6 or
perhaps only a few similar factors. In such a case, an
enhancement may be appropriate so that an attorney is
compensated at the rate that the attorney would receive in
cases not governed by the federal fee-shifting statutes.
But in order to provide a calculation that is objective and
reviewable, the trial judge should adjust the attorney’s
hourly rate in accordance with specific proof linking the
attorney’s ability to a prevailing market rate.
Second, an enhancement may be appropriate if the
——————
5 Respondents correctly note that an attorney’s “brilliant insights and
critical maneuvers sometimes matter far more than hours worked or
years of experience.” Brief for Respondents 14. But as we said in Blum
v. Stenson, 465 U. S. 886, 898 (1984), “[i]n those cases, the special skill
and experience of counsel should be reflected in the reasonableness of
the hourly rates.”
6 See, e.g., Salazar v. District of Columbia, 123 F. Supp. 2d 8 (DC
2000); Laffey v. Northwest Airlines, Inc., 572 F. Supp. 354 (DC 1983),
aff’d in part, rev’d in part, 746 F. 2d 4 (CADC 1984).


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

attorney’s performance includes an extraordinary outlay of
expenses and the litigation is exceptionally protracted. As
Judge Carnes noted below, when an attorney agrees to
represent a civil rights plaintiff who cannot afford to pay
the attorney, the attorney presumably understands that
no reimbursement is likely to be received until the suc
cessful resolution of the case, 532 F. 3d, at 1227, and
therefore enhancements to compensate for delay in reim
bursement for expenses must be reserved for unusual
cases. In such exceptional cases, however, an enhance
ment may be allowed, but the amount of the enhancement
must be calculated using a method that is reasonable,
objective, and capable of being reviewed on appeal, such as
by applying a standard rate of interest to the qualifying
outlays of expenses.
Third, there may be extraordinary circumstances in
which an attorney’s performance involves exceptional
delay in the payment of fees. An attorney who expects to
be compensated under §1988 presumably understands
that payment of fees will generally not come until the end
of the case, if at all. See 532 F. 3d, at 1227 (opinion of
Carnes, J.). Compensation for this delay is generally
made “either by basing the award on current rates or by
adjusting the fee based on historical rates to reflect its
present value.” Missouri v. Jenkins, 491 U. S. 274, 282
(1989) (internal quotation marks omitted). But we do not
rule out the possibility that an enhancement may be ap
propriate where an attorney assumes these costs in the
face of unanticipated delay, particularly where the delay is
unjustifiably caused by the defense. In such a case, how
ever, the enhancement should be calculated by applying a
method similar to that described above in connection with
exceptional delay in obtaining reimbursement for
expenses.
We reject the suggestion that it is appropriate to grant
performance enhancements on the ground that departures


12

PERDUE v. KENNY A.
Opinion of the Court

from hourly billing are becoming more common. As we
have noted, the lodestar was adopted in part because it
provides a rough approximation of general billing prac
tices, and accordingly, if hourly billing becomes unusual,
an alternative to the lodestar method may have to be
found. However, neither respondents nor their amici
contend that that day has arrived. Nor have they shown
that permitting the award of enhancements on top of the
lodestar figure corresponds to prevailing practice in the
general run of cases.
We are told that, under an increasingly popular ar
rangement, attorneys are paid at a reduced hourly rate
but receive a bonus if certain specified results are ob
tained, and this practice is analogized to the award of an
enhancement such as the one in this case. Brief for Re
spondents 55–57. The analogy, however, is flawed. An
attorney who agrees, at the outset of the representation, to
a reduced hourly rate in exchange for the opportunity to
earn a performance bonus is in a position far different
from an attorney in a §1988 case who is compensated at
the full prevailing rate and then seeks a performance
enhancement in addition to the lodestar amount after the
litigation has concluded. Reliance on these comparisons
for the purposes of administering enhancements, there
fore, is not appropriate.
V
In the present case, the District Court did not provide
proper justification for the large enhancement that it
awarded. The court increased the lodestar award by 75%
but, as far as the court’s opinion reveals, this figure ap
pears to have been essentially arbitrary. Why, for exam
ple, did the court grant a 75% enhancement instead of the
100% increase that respondents sought? And why 75%
rather than 50% or 25% or 10%?
The District Court commented that the enhancement


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of the Court

was the “minimum enhancement of the lodestar necessary
to reasonably compensate [respondents’] counsel.” 454
F. Supp. 2d, at 1290. But the effect of the enhancement
was to increase the top rate for the attorneys to more than
$866 per hour,7 and the District Court did not point to
anything in the record that shows that this is an appro
priate figure for the relevant market.
The District Court pointed to the fact that respondents’
counsel had to make extraordinary outlays for expenses
and had to wait for reimbursement, id., at 1288, but the
court did not calculate the amount of the enhancement
that is attributable to this factor. Similarly, the District
Court noted that respondents’ counsel did not receive fees
on an ongoing basis while the case was pending, but the
court did not sufficiently link this factor to proof in the
record that the delay here was outside the normal range
expected by attorneys who rely on §1988 for the payment
of their fees or quantify the disparity. Nor did the court
provide a calculation of the cost to counsel of any extraor
dinary and unwarranted delay. And the court’s reliance
on the contingency of the outcome contravenes our holding
in Dague. See 505 U. S., at 565.
Finally, insofar as the District Court relied on a com
parison of the performance of counsel in this case with the
performance of counsel in unnamed prior cases, the Dis
trict Court did not employ a methodology that permitted
——————
7 JUSTICE

BREYER’s reliance on the average hourly rate for all of re
spondents’ attorneys is highly misleading. See post, at 10. In calculat
ing the lodestar, the District Court found that the hourly rate for each
of these attorneys was “eminently fair and reasonable” and “consistent
with the prevailing market rates in Atlanta for comparable work.” 454
F. Supp. 2d, at 1285–1286. JUSTICE BREYER’s calculation of an average
hourly rate for all attorney hours reflects nothing more than the fact
that much of the work was performed by attorneys whose “fair and
reasonable” market rate was below the market average. There is
nothing unfair about compensating these attorneys at the very rate that
they requested.


14

PERDUE v. KENNY A.
Opinion of the Court

meaningful appellate review. Needless to say, we do not
question the sincerity of the District Court’s observations,
and we are in no position to assess their accuracy. But
when a trial judge awards an enhancement on an impres
sionistic basis, a major purpose of the lodestar method—
providing an objective and reviewable basis for fees, see
id., at 566—is undermined.
Determining a “reasonable attorney’s fee” is a matter
that is committed to the sound discretion of a trial judge,
see 42 U. S. C. §1988 (permitting court, “in its discretion,”
to award fees), but the judge’s discretion is not unlimited.
It is essential that the judge provide a reasonably specific
explanation for all aspects of a fee determination, includ
ing any award of an enhancement. Unless such an expla
nation is given, adequate appellate review is not feasible,
and without such review, widely disparate awards may be
made, and awards may be influenced (or at least, may
appear to be influenced) by a judge’s subjective opinion
regarding particular attorneys or the importance of the
case. In addition, in future cases, defendants contemplat
ing the possibility of settlement will have no way to esti
mate the likelihood of having to pay a potentially huge
enhancement. See Marek v. Chesny, 473 U. S. 1, 7 (1985)
(“ ‘[M]any a defendant would be unwilling to make a bind
ing settlement offer on terms that left it exposed to liabil
ity for attorney’s fees in whatever amount the court might
fix on motion of the plaintiff ’ ”).
Section 1988 serves an important public purpose by
making it possible for persons without means to bring suit
to vindicate their rights. But unjustified enhancements
that serve only to enrich attorneys are not consistent with
the statute’s aim.8 In many cases, attorney’s fees awarded
——————
8 JUSTICE BREYER’s opinion dramatically illustrates the danger of
allowing a trial judge to award a huge enhancement not supported by
any discernible methodology. That approach would retain the $4.5


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

Opinion of the Court

under §1988 are not paid by the individuals responsible
for the constitutional or statutory violations on which the
judgment is based. Instead, the fees are paid in effect by
state and local taxpayers, and because state and local
governments have limited budgets, money that is used to
pay attorney’s fees is money that cannot be used for pro
grams that provide vital public services. Cf. Horne v.
Flores, 557 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (slip op., at 11, 12) (pay
ment of money pursuant to a federal-court order diverts
funds from other state or local programs).
*
*
*
For all these reasons, the judgment of the Court of
Appeals is reversed, and the case is remanded for proceed
ings consistent with this opinion.
It is so ordered.

——————
million enhancement here so that respondents’ attorneys would earn as
much as the attorneys at some of the richest law firms in the country.
Post, at 10–11. These fees would be paid by the taxpayers of Georgia,
where the annual per capita income is less than $34,000, see Dept. of
Commerce, Bureau of Census, Statistical Abstract of the United States:
2010, p. 437 (2009) (Table 665) (figures for 2008), and the annual
salaries of attorneys employed by the State range from $48,000 for
entry-level lawyers to $118,000 for the highest paid division chief, see
Brief for State of Alabama et al. as Amici Curiae, 10, and n. 3 (citing
National Association of Attorneys General, Statistics on the Office of
the Attorney General, Fiscal Year 2006, pp. 37–39). Section 1988 was
enacted to ensure that civil rights plaintiffs are adequately repre
sented, not to provide such a windfall.

