6

CASH v. MAXWELL
SCALIA, J., dissenting

Supreme Court unreasonably applied Brady. In its view,
the prosecution committed a Brady violation by failing to
disclose two pieces of impeachment evidence: (1) the difference between Storch’s original plea deal and the plea
deal Storch negotiated independently from his public
defender after he offered to testify; and (2) Storch’s cooperation with law enforcement officials in the years preceding Maxwell’s trial. The Ninth Circuit said that this
evidence was material to Maxwell’s guilt, (which is what a
violation of Brady requires, see Strickler v. Greene, 527
U. S. 263, 280 (1999)), because “Storch’s testimony was
crucial to the prosecution’s case” and the evidence “could
have been used to undermine” Storch’s credibility. 628
F. 3d, at 512.
Neither of these contentions is remotely true. As for the
“crucial” nature of Storch’s testimony: Storch was just one
of four cellmates who recounted Maxwell’s incriminating
statements, and there was ample other evidence of Maxwell’s guilt, including an eyewitness identification and
evidence of Maxwell’s palm print near one of the murder
scenes. And as for the potential utility of the undisclosed
evidence in refuting Storch’s less-than-crucial testimony:
According to the Ninth Circuit, evidence that Storch originally had a plea deal of 36 months, which improved to 16
months after he offered to testify, would have “provided
Maxwell with impeaching evidence relevant to Storch’s
motivation for testifying.” Id., at 510. But the jury already knew that Storch would not have testified without a
deal. Storch said on the stand that he faced the possibility
of six years’ imprisonment on pending charges and received a 16-month deal in exchange for his testimony; and
responded in the negative when asked whether he “would
be willing to bring forth this story and tell the D. A. to
forget the kindness that he is showing towards” him.
3 Record 562–563. The additional knowledge that he
secured a deal that improved his sentence from 36 months

