4

CASH v. MAXWELL
SCALIA, J., dissenting

and two officers testified at the state evidentiary hearing
that in various cases Storch had provided them with accurate and reliable information. Id., at 125–126. Finally,
the Ninth Circuit accorded significance to trials subsequent to Maxwell’s in which Storch allegedly testified
falsely. The state court had concluded that these posttrial events did not establish the falsity of Storch’s testimony, id., at 136–137, and the Ninth Circuit apparently
agreed, see 628 F. 3d, at 503 (“The evidence of Storch’s
later lies under oath does not establish the nature of his
testimony at Maxwell’s trial”).*
In sum, the evidence relied on by the Ninth Circuit
might permit, but by no means compels, the conclusion
that Storch fabricated Maxwell’s admission. And that
leaves out of account (just as the Ninth Circuit inexplicably did) the other evidence suggesting that Storch was not
lying—including testimony that Maxwell confessed the
crime, indeed confessed the crime much more explicitly,
to two cellmates other than Storch. The statement of
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR makes its task far too easy by setting
out to show the unreasonableness of the California court’s
statement that there was “no credible or persuasive evidence Sidney Storch lied,” ante, at 1 (internal quotation
marks omitted). It is not the court’s statements that are
at issue here. To establish even a wild exaggeration is not
to establish what §2254(d)(2) requires: that the state
court’s “decision . . . was based on an unreasonable deter——————
* The evidence identified by JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR is similarly inconclusive, and the state habeas court reasonably discounted it. For instance, the so-called “manual,” ante, at 2, is all but illegible, 2 Record
461; as the state court recognized, the portions that can be read do not
reveal whether Storch was instructing another inmate to “provid[e]
substance or style.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 133. And the opinion of the
prosecutor who declined to use Storch in a trial that postdated Maxwell’s by nearly three years, ante, at 2, was deemed “unconvincing” by
the state court, since it was based on jail records of questionable
accuracy. App. to Pet. for Cert. 134.

