14

BROWN v. ENTERTAINMENT MERCHANTS ASSN.
ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

tions that they desire a character in the game to per
form.12 For example, a player who wants a video-game
character to swing a baseball bat—either to hit a ball or
smash a skull—could bring that about by simulating the
motion of actually swinging a bat.
These present-day and emerging characteristics of video
games must be considered together with characteristics of
the violent games that have already been marketed.
In some of these games, the violence is astounding.13
Victims by the dozens are killed with every imaginable
implement, including machine guns, shotguns, clubs,
hammers, axes, swords, and chainsaws. Victims are
dismembered, decapitated, disemboweled, set on fire, and
chopped into little pieces. They cry out in agony and beg
for mercy. Blood gushes, splatters, and pools. Severed
body parts and gobs of human remains are graphically
shown. In some games, points are awarded based, not
only on the number of victims killed, but on the killing
technique employed.
It also appears that there is no antisocial theme too base
for some in the video-game industry to exploit. There are
games in which a player can take on the identity and
reenact the killings carried out by the perpetrators of the
murders at Columbine High School and Virginia Tech.14
——————
12 See Schiesel, A Real Threat Now Faces the Nintendo Wii, N. Y.
Times, Dec. 3, 2010, p. F7 (describing how leading developers of video
game consoles are competing to deliver gesture-controlled gaming
devices).
13 For a sample of violent video games, see Wilson, The 10 Most
Violent Video Games of All Time, PCMag.com (Feb. 10, 2011),
http://www.pcmag.com/article2/0,2817,2379959,00.asp. To see brief
video excerpts from violent games, see Chomik, Top 10: Most Violent
Video Games, AskMen.com, http://www.askmen.com/top_10/videogame/
top-10-most-violent-video-games.html; Sayed, 15 Most Violent Video
Games That Made You Puke, Gamingbolt (May 2, 2010), http://
gamingbolt.com/15-most-violent-video-games-that-made-you-puke.
14 Webley, “School Shooter” Video Game to Reenact Columbine, Vir

