14

BROWN v. ENTERTAINMENT MERCHANTS ASSN.
Opinion of the Court

Of course, California has (wisely) declined to restrict
Saturday morning cartoons, the sale of games rated for
young children, or the distribution of pictures of guns.
The consequence is that its regulation is wildly underin
clusive when judged against its asserted justification,
which in our view is alone enough to defeat it. Underin
clusiveness raises serious doubts about whether the gov
ernment is in fact pursuing the interest it invokes, rather
than disfavoring a particular speaker or viewpoint. See
City of Ladue v. Gilleo, 512 U. S. 43, 51 (1994); Florida
Star v. B. J. F., 491 U. S. 524, 540 (1989). Here, Califor
nia has singled out the purveyors of video games for disfa
vored treatment—at least when compared to booksellers,
cartoonists, and movie producers—and has given no per
suasive reason why.
The Act is also seriously underinclusive in another
respect—and a respect that renders irrelevant the conten
tions of the concurrence and the dissents that video games
——————
a problem, and perhaps none of us would allow our own children to play
them. But there are all sorts of “problems”—some of them surely more
serious than this one—that cannot be addressed by governmental
restriction of free expression: for example, the problem of encouraging
anti-Semitism (National Socialist Party of America v. Skokie, 432 U. S.
43 (1977) (per curiam)), the problem of spreading a political philosophy
hostile to the Constitution (Noto v. United States, 367 U. S. 290 (1961)),
or the problem of encouraging disrespect for the Nation’s flag (Texas v.
Johnson, 491 U. S. 397 (1989)).
JUSTICE BREYER would hold that California has satisfied strict
scrutiny based upon his own research into the issue of the harmfulness
of violent video games. See post, at 20–35 (Appendixes to dissenting
opinion) (listing competing academic articles discussing the harmful
ness vel non of violent video games). The vast preponderance of this
research is outside the record—and in any event we do not see how it
could lead to JUSTICE BREYER’s conclusion, since he admits he cannot
say whether the studies on his side are right or wrong. Post, at 15.
Similarly, JUSTICE ALITO says he is not “sure” whether there are any
constitutionally dispositive differences between video games and other
media. Post, at 2. If that is so, then strict scrutiny plainly has not been
satisfied.

