16

BROWN v. ENTERTAINMENT MERCHANTS ASSN.
THOMAS, J., dissenting

stood “the freedom of speech” to include a right to speak to
children without going through their parents. As a conse
quence, I do not believe that laws limiting such speech—
for example, by requiring parental consent to speak to a
minor—“abridg[e] the freedom of speech” within the origi
nal meaning of the First Amendment.
We have recently noted that this Court does not have
“freewheeling authority to declare new categories of
speech outside the scope of the First Amendment.” Ste
vens, 559 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 9). But we also recog
nized that there may be “some categories of speech that
have been historically unprotected [and] have not yet been
specifically identified or discussed as such in our case
law.” Ibid. In my opinion, the historical evidence here
plainly reveals one such category.2
B
Admittedly, the original public understanding of a
constitutional provision does not always comport with
modern sensibilities.
See Morse, 551 U. S., at 419
(THOMAS, J., concurring) (treating students “as though it
——————
2 The majority responds that “it does not follow” from the historical
evidence “that the state has the power to prevent children from hearing
. . . anything without their parents’ prior consent.” Ante, at 7, n. 3.
Such a conclusion, the majority asserts, would lead to laws that, in its
view, would be undesirable and “obviously” unconstitutional. Ibid.
The majority’s circular argument misses the point. The question is
not whether certain laws might make sense to judges or legislators
today, but rather what the public likely understood “the freedom of
speech” to mean when the First Amendment was adopted. See District
of Columbia v. Heller, 554 U. S. 570, 634–635 (2008). I believe it is
clear that the founding public would not have understood “the freedom
of speech” to include speech to minor children bypassing their parents.
It follows that the First Amendment imposes no restriction on state
regulation of such speech. To note that there may not be “precedent for
[such] state control,” ante, at 8, n. 3, “is not to establish that [there] is a
constitutional right,” McIntyre v. Ohio Elections Comm’n, 514 U. S. 334,
373 (1995) (SCALIA, J., dissenting).

