Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

feedback.10 By wearing a special vest or other device, a
player will be able to experience physical sensations sup
posedly felt by a character on the screen.11 Some amici
who support respondents foresee the day when “ ‘virtual
reality shoot-‘em-ups’ ” will allow children to “ ‘actually feel
the splatting blood from the blown-off head’ ” of a victim.
Brief for Reporters Comm. for Freedom of the Press et al.
as Amici Curiae 29 (quoting H. Schechter, Savage Pas
times 18 (2005)).
Persons who play video games also have an unprece
dented ability to participate in the events that take place
in the virtual worlds that these games create. Players can
create their own video-game characters and can use pho
tos to produce characters that closely resemble actual
people. A person playing a sophisticated game can make a
multitude of choices and can thereby alter the course of
the action in the game. In addition, the means by which
players control the action in video games now bear a closer
relationship to the means by which people control action
in the real world. While the action in older games was
often directed with buttons or a joystick, players dictate
the action in newer games by engaging in the same mo
——————
10 T. Chatfield, Fun Inc.: Why Games are the Twenty-first Century’s
Most Serious Business 211 (2010) (predicting that “[w]e can expect . . .
physical feedback and motion detection as standard in every gaming
device in the near future”); J. Blascovich & J. Bailenson, Infinite
Reality: Avatars, Eternal Life, New Worlds, and the Dawn of the
Virtual Revolution 2 (2011) (“Technological developments powering
virtual worlds are accelerating, ensuring that virtual experiences will
become more immersive by providing sensory information that makes
people feel they are ‘inside’ virtual worlds” (emphasis in the original)).
11 See Topolsky, The Mindwire V5 Turns Gaming into Pure Electro
shock Torture, Engadget (Mar. 9, 2008), http://www.engadget.com/
2008/03/09/the-mindwire-v5-turns-gaming-into-pure-electroshock-torture;
Greenemeier, Video Game Vest Simulates Sensation of Being Capped,
Scientific American (Oct. 25, 2007), http://www.scientificamerican.com/
article.cfm?id=video-game-vest-simulates.

