Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

BREYER, J., dissenting

gasoline, lights him on fire, urinates on his burning body,
and finally kills him with a gunshot to the head. (Footage of one such game sequence has been submitted in the
record.) See also ante, at 14–15 (ALITO, J., concurring in
judgment). As in Miller and Ginsberg, the California law
clearly protects even the most violent games that possess
serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value.
§1746(d)(1)(A)(iii). And it is easier here than in Miller
or Ginsberg to separate the sheep from the goats at the
statute’s border. That is because here the industry itself has promulgated standards and created a review
process, in which adults who “typically have experience
with children” assess what games are inappropriate for
minors. See Entertainment Software Rating Board, Rating
Process, online at http://www.esrb.org/ratings/&ratings_
process.jsp (all Internet materials as visited June 24,
2011, and available in Clerk of Court’s case file).
There is, of course, one obvious difference: The Ginsberg
statute concerned depictions of “nudity,” while California’s
statute concerns extremely violent video games. But for
purposes of vagueness, why should that matter? JUSTICE
ALITO argues that the Miller standard sufficed because
there are “certain generally accepted norms concerning
expression related to sex,” whereas there are no similarly
“accepted standards regarding the suitability of violent
entertainment.” Ante, at 7–8. But there is no evidence
that is so. The Court relied on “community standards” in
Miller precisely because of the difficulty of articulating
“accepted norms” about depictions of sex. I can find no
difference—historical or otherwise—that is relevant to the
vagueness question. Indeed, the majority’s examples of
literary descriptions of violence, on which JUSTICE ALITO
relies, do not show anything relevant at all.
After all, one can find in literature as many (if not more)
descriptions of physical love as descriptions of violence.
Indeed, sex “has been a theme in art and literature

