Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

whole, would find [the game] appeals to a deviant or
morbid interest of minors.
“(ii) It is patently offensive to prevailing standards
in the community as to what is suitable for minors.
“(iii) It causes the game, as a whole, to lack serious
literary, artistic, political, or scientific value for mi
nors.” §1746(d)(1)(A).2
C
The first important difference between the Ginsberg law
and the California violent video game statute concerns
their respective threshold requirements. As noted, the
Ginsberg law built upon the test for adult obscenity, and
the current adult obscenity test, which was set out in
Miller, requires an obscenity statute to contain a threshold
limitation that restricts the statute’s coverage to specifi
cally defined “hard core” depictions. See 413 U. S., at 23–
25, 27. The Miller Court gave as an example a statute
that applies to only “[p]atently offensive representations
or descriptions of ultimate sexual acts,” “masturbation,
excretory functions, and lewd exhibition of the genitals.”
Id., at 25. The Miller Court clearly viewed this threshold
limitation as serving a vital notice function. “We are
satisfied,” the Court wrote, “that these specific prerequi
sites will provide fair notice to a dealer in such materials
that his public and commercial activities may bring prose
cution.” Id., at 27; see also Reno, supra, at 873 (observing
that Miller’s threshold limitation “reduces the vagueness
——————
2 Under the California law, a game that meets the threshold require
ment set out in text also qualifies as “violent” if it “[e]nables the player
to virtually inflict serious injury upon images of human beings or
characters with substantially human characteristics in a manner which
is especially heinous, cruel, or depraved in that it involves torture or
serious physical abuse to the victim.” §1746(d)(1)(B). In the Court of
Appeals, California conceded that this alternative definition is uncon
stitutional, 556 F. 3d 950, 954, n. 5 (CA9 2009), and therefore only the
requirements set out in text are now before us.

