Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

One of the three elements at issue here refers expressly
to “prevailing standards in the community as to what is
suitable for minors.” §1746(d)(1)(A)(ii). Another element
points in the same direction, asking whether “[a] reason
able person, considering [a] game as a whole,” would find
that it “appeals to a deviant or morbid interest of minors.”
§1746(d)(1)(A)(i) (emphasis added).
The terms “deviant” and “morbid” are not defined in
the statute, and California offers no reason to think that
its courts would give the terms anything other than their
ordinary meaning. See Reply Brief for Petitioners 5 (argu
ing that “[a] reasonable person can make this judgment
through . . . a common understanding and definition of the
applicable terms”). I therefore assume that “deviant” and
“morbid” carry the meaning that they convey in ordinary
speech. The adjective “deviant” ordinarily means “deviat
ing . . . from some accepted norm,” and the term “morbid”
means “of, relating to, or characteristic of disease.” Web
ster’s 618, 1469. A “deviant or morbid interest” in
violence, therefore, appears to be an interest that de
viates from what is regarded—presumably in accordance
with some generally accepted standard—as normal and
healthy. Thus, the application of the California law is
heavily dependent on the identification of generally ac
cepted standards regarding the suitability of violent enter
tainment for minors.
The California Legislature seems to have assumed that
these standards are sufficiently well known so that a
person of ordinary intelligence would have fair notice as to
whether the kind and degree of violence in a particular
game is enough to qualify the game as “violent.” And
because the Miller test looks to community standards, the
legislature may have thought that the use of undefined
community standards in the violent video game law would
not present vagueness problems.
There is a critical difference, however, between obscen

