Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011) 


11

ALITO, J., concurring in judgment


B

The Court’s opinion distorts the effect of the California
law. I certainly agree with the Court that the government
has no “free-floating power to restrict the ideas to which
children may be exposed,” ante, at 7, but the California
law does not exercise such a power. If parents want their
child to have a violent video game, the California law does
not interfere with that parental prerogative. Instead, the
California law reinforces parental decisionmaking in
exactly the same way as the New York statute upheld in
Ginsberg. Under both laws, minors are prevented from
purchasing certain materials; and under both laws, par
ents are free to supply their children with these items if
that is their wish.
Citing the video-game industry’s voluntary rating sys
tem, the Court argues that the California law does not
“meet a substantial need of parents who wish to restrict
their children’s access to violent video games but cannot
do so.” Ante, at 15. The Court does not mention the fact
that the industry adopted this system in response to the
threat of federal regulation, Brief for Activision Blizzard,
Inc., as Amicus Curiae 7–10, a threat that the Court’s
opinion may now be seen as largely eliminating. Nor does
the Court acknowledge that compliance with this system
at the time of the enactment of the California law left
much to be desired6—or that future enforcement may
decline if the video-game industry perceives that any
threat of government regulation has vanished. Nor does
——————
6A

2004 Federal Trade Commission Report showed that 69 percent of
unaccompanied children ages 13 to 16 were able to buy M-rated games
and that 56 percent of 13-year-olds were able to buy an M-rated game.
Marketing Violent Entertainment to Children: A Fourth Follow-Up
Review of Industry Practices in the Motion Picture, Music Recording &
Electronic Game Industries 26–28 (July 2004), http://www.ftc.gov/os/
2004/07/040708kidsviolencerpt.pdf (all Internet materials as visited
June 24, 2011, and available in Clerk of Court’s case file).

