4

BROWN v. ENTERTAINMENT MERCHANTS ASSN.
Opinion of the Court

historical, or artistic value,” §48(b). We held that statute
to be an impermissible content-based restriction on
speech. There was no American tradition of forbidding the
depiction of animal cruelty—though States have long had
laws against committing it.
The Government argued in Stevens that lack of a his
torical warrant did not matter; that it could create new
categories of unprotected speech by applying a “simple
balancing test” that weighs the value of a particular cate
gory of speech against its social costs and then punishes
that category of speech if it fails the test. Stevens, 559
U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 7). We emphatically rejected that
“startling and dangerous” proposition. Ibid. “Maybe there
are some categories of speech that have been historically
unprotected, but have not yet been specifically identified
or discussed as such in our case law.” Id., at ___ (slip op.,
at 9). But without persuasive evidence that a novel re
striction on content is part of a long (if heretofore unrec
ognized) tradition of proscription, a legislature may not
revise the “judgment [of] the American people,” embodied
in the First Amendment, “that the benefits of its restric
tions on the Government outweigh the costs.” Id., at ___
(slip op., at 7).
That holding controls this case.1 As in Stevens, Califor
——————
1 JUSTICE ALITO distinguishes Stevens on several grounds that seem to
us ill founded. He suggests, post, at 10 (opinion concurring in judg
ment), that Stevens did not apply strict scrutiny. If that is so (and we
doubt it), it would make this an a fortiori case. He says, post, at 9, 10,
that the California Act punishes the sale or rental rather than the
“creation” or “possession” of violent depictions. That distinction ap
pears nowhere in Stevens itself, and for good reason: It would make
permissible the prohibition of printing or selling books—though not the
writing of them. Whether government regulation applies to creating,
distributing, or consuming speech makes no difference. And finally,
JUSTICE ALITO points out, post, at 10, that Stevens “left open the possi
bility that a more narrowly drawn statute” would be constitutional.
True, but entirely irrelevant. Stevens said, 559 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at

