12

BROWN v. ENTERTAINMENT MERCHANTS ASSN.
BREYER, J., dissenting

turity’ ” and are “more vulnerable or susceptible to nega­
tive influences and outside pressures,” and that their
“character . . . is not as well formed as that of an adult.”
Roper v. Simmons, 543 U. S. 551, 569–570 (2005). And we
have therefore recognized “a compelling interest in pro­
tecting the physical and psychological well-being of mi­
nors.” Sable Communications, supra, at 126.
At the same time, there is considerable evidence that
California’s statute significantly furthers this compelling
interest. That is, in part, because video games are excel­
lent teaching tools. Learning a practical task often means
developing habits, becoming accustomed to performing the
task, and receiving positive reinforcement when perform­
ing that task well. Video games can help develop habits,
accustom the player to performance of the task, and
reward the player for performing that task well. Why
else would the Armed Forces incorporate video games
into its training? See CNN, War Games: Military Train­
ing Goes High-Tech (Nov. 22, 2001), online at
http://articles.cnn.com/2001–11–2 / tech / war.games_1_ictbill-swartout-real-world-training?_s=PM:TECH.
When the military uses video games to help soldiers
train for missions, it is using this medium for a beneficial
purpose. But California argues that when the teaching
features of video games are put to less desirable ends,
harm can ensue. In particular, extremely violent games
can harm children by rewarding them for being violently
aggressive in play, and thereby often teaching them to be
violently aggressive in life. And video games can cause
more harm in this respect than can typically passive
media, such as books or films or television programs.
There are many scientific studies that support Califor­
nia’s views. Social scientists, for example, have found
causal evidence that playing these games results in harm.
Longitudinal studies, which measure changes over time,
have found that increased exposure to violent video games
2

