6

BROWN v. ENTERTAINMENT MERCHANTS ASSN.
BREYER, J., dissenting

substituted the word “deviant” for the words “prurient”
and “shameful,” and it three times added the words “for
minors.” The word “deviant” differs from “prurient” and
“shameful,” but it would seem no less suited to defining
and narrowing the reach of the statute. And the addition
of “for minors” to a version of the Miller standard was
approved in Ginsberg, 390 U. S., at 643, even though the
New York law “dr[ew] no distinction between young chil­
dren and adolescents who are nearing the age of majority,”
ante, at 8 (opinion of ALITO, J.).
Both the Miller standard and the law upheld in Gins
berg lack perfect clarity. But that fact reflects the dif­
ficulty of the Court’s long search for words capable of
protecting expression without depriving the State of a
legitimate constitutional power to regulate. As is well
known, at one point Justice Stewart thought he could do
no better in defining obscenity than, “I know it when I see
it.” Jacobellis v. Ohio, 378 U. S. 184, 197 (1964) (concur­
ring opinion). And Justice Douglas dissented from Miller’s
standard, which he thought was still too vague. 413 U. S.,
at 39–40. Ultimately, however, this Court accepted the
“community standards” tests used in Miller and Ginsberg.
They reflect the fact that sometimes, even when a precise
standard proves elusive, it is easy enough to identify
instances that fall within a legitimate regulation. And
they seek to draw a line, which, while favoring free ex­
pression, will nonetheless permit a legislature to find the
words necessary to accomplish a legitimate constitutional
objective. Cf. Williams, supra, at 304 (the Constitution
does not always require “ ‘perfect clarity and precise guid­
ance,’ ” even when “ ‘expressive activity’ ” is involved).
What, then, is the difference between Ginsberg and
Miller on the one hand and the California law on the
other? It will often be easy to pick out cases at which
California’s statute directly aims, involving, say, a charac­
ter who shoots out a police officer’s knee, douses him with

