8

BROWN v. ENTERTAINMENT MERCHANTS ASSN.
ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

ity laws and laws regulating violence in entertainment.
By the time of this Court’s landmark obscenity cases in
the 1960’s, obscenity had long been prohibited, see Roth,
354 U. S., at 484–485, and this experience had helped to
shape certain generally accepted norms concerning ex
pression related to sex.
There is no similar history regarding expression related
to violence. As the Court notes, classic literature contains
descriptions of great violence, and even children’s stories
sometimes depict very violent scenes. See ante, at 8–9.
Although our society does not generally regard all depic
tions of violence as suitable for children or adolescents, the
prevalence of violent depictions in children’s literature and
entertainment creates numerous opportunities for reason
able people to disagree about which depictions may excite
“deviant” or “morbid” impulses. See Edwards & Berman,
Regulating Violence on Television, 89 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1487,
1523 (1995) (observing that the Miller test would be diffi
cult to apply to violent expression because “there is noth
ing even approaching a consensus on low-value violence”).
Finally, the difficulty of ascertaining the community
standards incorporated into the California law is com
pounded by the legislature’s decision to lump all minors
together. The California law draws no distinction between
young children and adolescents who are nearing the age of
majority.
In response to a question at oral argument, the attorney
defending the constitutionality of the California law said
that the State would accept a narrowing construction of
the law under which the law’s references to “minors”
would be interpreted to refer to the oldest minors—that is,
those just short of 18. Tr. of Oral Arg. 11–12. However,
“it is not within our power to construe and narrow state
laws.” Grayned, 408 U. S., at 110. We can only “ ‘extrapo
late [their] allowable meaning’ ” from the statutory text
and authoritative interpretations of similar laws by courts

