Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of the Court

children while marooned on an island. W. Golding, Lord
of the Flies 208–209 (1997 ed.).4
This is not to say that minors’ consumption of violent
entertainment has never encountered resistance. In the
1800’s, dime novels depicting crime and “penny dreadfuls”
(named for their price and content) were blamed in some
quarters for juvenile delinquency. See Brief for Cato
Institute as Amicus Curiae 6–7. When motion pictures
came along, they became the villains instead. “The days
when the police looked upon dime novels as the most
dangerous of textbooks in the school for crime are drawing
to a close. . . . They say that the moving picture machine
. . . tends even more than did the dime novel to turn the
thoughts of the easily influenced to paths which some
times lead to prison.” Moving Pictures as Helps to Crime,
N. Y. Times, Feb. 21, 1909, quoted in Brief for Cato Insti
tute, at 8. For a time, our Court did permit broad censor
ship of movies because of their capacity to be “used for
evil,” see Mutual Film Corp. v. Industrial Comm’n of Ohio,
236 U. S. 230, 242 (1915), but we eventually reversed
course, Joseph Burstyn, Inc., 343 U. S., at 502; see also
Erznoznik, supra, at 212–214 (invalidating a drive-in
——————
4 JUSTICE ALITO accuses us of pronouncing that playing violent video
games “is not different in ‘kind’ ” from reading violent literature. Post,
at 2. Well of course it is different in kind, but not in a way that causes
the provision and viewing of violent video games, unlike the provision
and reading of books, not to be expressive activity and hence not to
enjoy First Amendment protection. Reading Dante is unquestionably
more cultured and intellectually edifying than playing Mortal Kombat.
But these cultural and intellectual differences are not constitutional
ones. Crudely violent video games, tawdry TV shows, and cheap novels
and magazines are no less forms of speech than The Divine Comedy,
and restrictions upon them must survive strict scrutiny—a question to
which we devote our attention in Part III, infra. Even if we can see in
them “nothing of any possible value to society . . . , they are as much
entitled to the protection of free speech as the best of literature.”
Winters v. New York, 333 U. S. 507, 510 (1948).

