2

BROWN v. ENTERTAINMENT MERCHANTS ASSN.
Syllabus
mistaken. This country has no tradition of specially restricting chil
dren’s access to depictions of violence. And California’s claim that
“interactive” video games present special problems, in that the player
participates in the violent action on screen and determines its out
come, is unpersuasive. Pp. 2–11.
(b) Because the Act imposes a restriction on the content of pro
tected speech, it is invalid unless California can demonstrate that it
passes strict scrutiny, i.e., it is justified by a compelling government
interest and is narrowly drawn to serve that interest. R. A. V. v. St.
Paul, 505 U. S. 377, 395. California cannot meet that standard. Psy
chological studies purporting to show a connection between exposure
to violent video games and harmful effects on children do not prove
that such exposure causes minors to act aggressively. Any demon
strated effects are both small and indistinguishable from effects pro
duced by other media. Since California has declined to restrict those
other media, e.g., Saturday morning cartoons, its video-game regula
tion is wildly underinclusive, raising serious doubts about whether
the State is pursuing the interest it invokes or is instead disfavoring
a particular speaker or viewpoint. California also cannot show that
the Act’s restrictions meet the alleged substantial need of parents
who wish to restrict their children’s access to violent videos. The
video-game industry’s voluntary rating system already accomplishes
that to a large extent. Moreover, as a means of assisting parents the
Act is greatly overinclusive, since not all of the children who are pro
hibited from purchasing violent video games have parents who dis
approve of their doing so. The Act cannot satisfy strict scrutiny.
Pp. 11–18.

556 F. 3d 950, affirmed.
SCALIA, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which KENNEDY,
GINSBURG, SOTOMAYOR, and KAGAN, JJ., joined. ALITO, J., filed an opin
ion concurring in the judgment, in which ROBERTS, C. J., joined. THOMAS, J., and BREYER, J., filed dissenting opinions.

