Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of the Court

nia has tried to make violent-speech regulation look like
obscenity regulation by appending a saving clause re
quired for the latter. That does not suffice. Our cases
have been clear that the obscenity exception to the First
Amendment does not cover whatever a legislature finds
shocking, but only depictions of “sexual conduct,” Miller,
supra, at 24. See also Cohen v. California, 403 U. S. 15,
20 (1971); Roth, supra, at 487, and n. 20.
Stevens was not the first time we have encountered and
rejected a State’s attempt to shoehorn speech about vio
lence into obscenity. In Winters, we considered a New
York criminal statute “forbid[ding] the massing of stories
of bloodshed and lust in such a way as to incite to crime
against the person,” 333 U. S., at 514. The New York
Court of Appeals upheld the provision as a law against
obscenity. “[T]here can be no more precise test of written
indecency or obscenity,” it said, “than the continuing and
changeable experience of the community as to what types
of books are likely to bring about the corruption of public
morals or other analogous injury to the public order. ” Id.,
at 514 (internal quotation marks omitted). That is of
course the same expansive view of governmental power to
abridge the freedom of speech based on interest-balancing
that we rejected in Stevens. Our opinion in Winters, which
concluded that the New York statute failed a heightened
vagueness standard applicable to restrictions upon speech
entitled to First Amendment protection, 333 U. S., at 517–
519, made clear that violence is not part of the obscenity
that the Constitution permits to be regulated. The speech
reached by the statute contained “no indecency or obscen
ity in any sense heretofore known to the law.” Id., at 519.
——————
19), that the “crush-video” statute at issue there might pass muster if it
were limited to videos of acts of animal cruelty that violated the law
where the acts were performed. There is no contention that any of the
virtual characters depicted in the imaginative videos at issue here are
criminally liable.

