6

BROWN v. ENTERTAINMENT MERCHANTS ASSN.
Opinion of the Court

Because speech about violence is not obscene, it is of no
consequence that California’s statute mimics the New
York statute regulating obscenity-for-minors that we
upheld in Ginsberg v. New York, 390 U. S. 629 (1968).
That case approved a prohibition on the sale to minors of
sexual material that would be obscene from the perspec
tive of a child.2 We held that the legislature could
“adjus[t] the definition of obscenity ‘to social realities by
permitting the appeal of this type of material to be as
sessed in terms of the sexual interests . . .’ of . . . minors. ”
Id., at 638 (quoting Mishkin v. New York, 383 U. S. 502,
509 (1966)). And because “obscenity is not protected
expression,” the New York statute could be sustained so
long as the legislature’s judgment that the proscribed
materials were harmful to children “was not irrational.”
390 U. S., at 641.
The California Act is something else entirely. It does
not adjust the boundaries of an existing category of unpro
tected speech to ensure that a definition designed for
adults is not uncritically applied to children. California
does not argue that it is empowered to prohibit selling
offensively violent works to adults—and it is wise not to,
since that is but a hair’s breadth from the argument re
jected in Stevens. Instead, it wishes to create a wholly
new category of content-based regulation that is permissi
ble only for speech directed at children.
That is unprecedented and mistaken. “[M]inors are
——————
2 The statute in Ginsberg restricted the sale of certain depictions of
“nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sado-masochistic abuse,”
that were “‘[h]armful to minors.’ ” A depiction was harmful to minors if it:
“(i) predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid
interests of minors, and
“(ii) is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult commu
nity as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for minors, and
“(iii) is utterly without redeeming social importance for minors.” 390
U. S., at 646 (Appendix A to opinion of the Court) (quoting N. Y. Penal
Law §484–h(1)(f)).

