12

BROWN v. ENTERTAINMENT MERCHANTS ASSN.
THOMAS, J., dissenting

bloodshed and violence; to teach the young to use coarse
language, and cherish vulgar ideas; . . . and to fill [the
youthful mind] with the horrors of a debased and de
bauched fancy”); 1 id., at 167 (recalling that children’s
books were “full of nonsense” and “lies”); Cardell, p. xiv
(“The fancy of converting inferior animals into ‘teachers of
children,’ has been carried to ridiculous extravagance”);
see also MacDonald 83, 103 (noting that fables and works
of fantasy were not popular in America in the 1700’s).
Adults carefully controlled what they published for
children. Stories written for children were dedicated to
moral instruction and were relatively austere, lacking
details that might titillate children’s minds. See MacLeod
24–25, 42–48; see also id., at 42 (“The authors of juvenile
fiction imposed the constraints upon themselves in the
name of duty, and for the sake of giving children what
they thought children should have, although they were
often well aware that children might prefer more excit
ing fare”); Francis, American Children’s Literature,
1646–1880, in American Childhood 208–209 (J. Hawes &
N. Hiner eds. 1985). John Newbery, the publisher often
credited with creating the genre of children’s literature,
removed traditional folk characters, like Tom Thumb,
from their original stories and placed them in new moral
ity tales in which good children were rewarded and dis
obedient children punished. Reinier 12.
Parents had total authority over what their children
read. See A. MacLeod, American Childhood 177 (1994)
(“Ideally, if not always actually, nineteenth-century par
ents regulated their children’s lives fully, certainly includ
ing their reading”). Lydia Child put it bluntly in The
Mother’s Book: “Children . . . should not read anything
without a mother’s knowledge and sanction; this is par
ticularly necessary between the ages of twelve and six
teen.” Child 92; see also id., at 143 (“[P]arents, or some
guardian friends, should carefully examine every volume

