16

BROWN v. ENTERTAINMENT MERCHANTS ASSN.
ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

“far more concretely interactive.” Brief for IGDA et al. as
Amici Curiae 3. And on this point, the game developers
are surely correct.
It is certainly true, as the Court notes, that “ ‘[l]it
erature, when it is successful draws the reader into the
story, makes him identify with the characters, invites
him to judge them and quarrel with them, to experience
their joys and sufferings as the reader’s own.’ ” Ante, at 11
(quoting American Amusement Machine Assn. v. Kendrick,
244 F. 3d 572, 577 (CA7 2001)). But only an extraordinar
ily imaginative reader who reads a description of a killing
in a literary work will experience that event as vividly as
he might if he played the role of the killer in a video game.
To take an example, think of a person who reads the
passage in Crime and Punishment in which Raskolnikov kills the old pawn broker with an axe. See F.
Dostoyevsky, Crime and Punishment 78 (Modern Library
ed. 1950). Compare that reader with a video-game player
who creates an avatar that bears his own image; who sees
a realistic image of the victim and the scene of the killing
in high definition and in three dimensions; who is forced to
decide whether or not to kill the victim and decides to do
so; who then pretends to grasp an axe, to raise it above the
head of the victim, and then to bring it down; who hears
the thud of the axe hitting her head and her cry of pain;
who sees her split skull and feels the sensation of blood on
his face and hands. For most people, the two experiences
will not be the same.19
When all of the characteristics of video games are taken
into account, there is certainly a reasonable basis for
——————
19 As the Court notes, there are a few children’s books that ask young
readers to step into the shoes of a character and to make choices that
take the stories along one of a very limited number of possible lines.
See ante, at 10. But the very nature of the print medium makes it
impossible for a book to offer anything like the same number of choices
as those provided by a video game.

