Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

Opinion of the Court

games cause minors to act aggressively (which would at
least be a beginning). Instead, “[n]early all of the research
is based on correlation, not evidence of causation, and
most of the studies suffer from significant, admitted flaws
in methodology.” Video Software Dealers Assn. 556 F. 3d,
at 964. They show at best some correlation between expo
sure to violent entertainment and minuscule real-world
effects, such as children’s feeling more aggressive or mak
ing louder noises in the few minutes after playing a vio
lent game than after playing a nonviolent game.7
Even taking for granted Dr. Anderson’s conclusions that
violent video games produce some effect on children’s
feelings of aggression, those effects are both small and
indistinguishable from effects produced by other media.
In his testimony in a similar lawsuit, Dr. Anderson admit
ted that the “effect sizes” of children’s exposure to violent
video games are “about the same” as that produced by
their exposure to violence on television. App. 1263. And
he admits that the same effects have been found when
children watch cartoons starring Bugs Bunny or the Road
Runner, id., at 1304, or when they play video games like
Sonic the Hedgehog that are rated “E” (appropriate for all
ages), id., at 1270, or even when they “vie[w] a picture of a
gun,” id., at 1315–1316.8
——————
7 One study, for example, found that children who had just finished
playing violent video games were more likely to fill in the blank letter
in “explo_e” with a “d” (so that it reads “explode”) than with an “r”
(“explore”). App. 496, 506 (internal quotation marks omitted). The
prevention of this phenomenon, which might have been anticipated
with common sense, is not a compelling state interest.
8JUSTICE ALITO is mistaken in thinking that we fail to take account of
“new and rapidly evolving technology,” post, at 1. The studies in
question pertain to that new and rapidly evolving technology, and fail
to show, with the degree of certitude that strict scrutiny requires, that
this subject-matter restriction on speech is justified. Nor is JUSTICE
ALITO correct in attributing to us the view that “violent video games
really present no serious problem.” Post, at 2. Perhaps they do present

