16

BROWN v. ENTERTAINMENT MERCHANTS ASSN.
Opinion of the Court

to minors only with parental consent. Id., at 47. In 2009,
the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) found that, as a
result of this system, “the video game industry outpaces
the movie and music industries” in “(1) restricting target
marketing of mature-rated products to children; (2) clearly
and prominently disclosing rating information; and (3) re
stricting children’s access to mature-rated products at
retail.” FTC, Report to Congress, Marketing Violent
Entertainment to Children 30 (Dec. 2009), online at http://
www.ftc.gov/os/2009/12/P994511violententertainment.pdf
(as visited June 24, 2011, and available in Clerk of Court’s
case file) (FTC Report). This system does much to ensure
that minors cannot purchase seriously violent games on
their own, and that parents who care about the matter can
readily evaluate the games their children bring home.
Filling the remaining modest gap in concerned-parents’
control can hardly be a compelling state interest.9
And finally, the Act’s purported aid to parental author
ity is vastly overinclusive. Not all of the children who are
forbidden to purchase violent video games on their own
have parents who care whether they purchase violent
video games. While some of the legislation’s effect may
indeed be in support of what some parents of the re
stricted children actually want, its entire effect is only in
support of what the State thinks parents ought to want.
This is not the narrow tailoring to “assisting parents” that
——————
9 JUSTICE

BREYER concludes that the remaining gap is compelling
because, according to the FTC’s report, some “20% of those under 17 are
still able to buy M-rated games.” Post, at 18 (citing FTC Report 28).
But some gap in compliance is unavoidable. The sale of alcohol to
minors, for example, has long been illegal, but a 2005 study suggests
that about 18% of retailers still sell alcohol to those under the drinking
age. Brief for State of Rhode Island et al. as Amici Curiae 18. Even if
the sale of violent video games to minors could be deterred further by
increasing regulation, the government does not have a compelling
interest in each marginal percentage point by which its goals are
advanced.

