Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of the Court

entitled to a significant measure of First Amendment
protection, and only in relatively narrow and well-defined
circumstances may government bar public dissemination
of protected materials to them.” Erznoznik v. Jackson
ville, 422 U. S. 205, 212–213 (1975) (citation omitted). No
doubt a State possesses legitimate power to protect chil
dren from harm, Ginsberg, supra, at 640–641; Prince v.
Massachusetts, 321 U. S. 158, 165 (1944), but that does
not include a free-floating power to restrict the ideas to
which children may be exposed. “Speech that is neither
obscene as to youths nor subject to some other legitimate
proscription cannot be suppressed solely to protect the
young from ideas or images that a legislative body thinks
unsuitable for them.” Erznoznik, supra, at 213–214.3
——————
3 JUSTICE

THOMAS ignores the holding of Erznoznik, and denies that
persons under 18 have any constitutional right to speak or be spoken to
without their parents’ consent. He cites no case, state or federal,
supporting this view, and to our knowledge there is none. Most of his
dissent is devoted to the proposition that parents have traditionally had
the power to control what their children hear and say. This is true
enough. And it perhaps follows from this that the state has the power
to enforce parental prohibitions—to require, for example, that the
promoters of a rock concert exclude those minors whose parents have
advised the promoters that their children are forbidden to attend. But
it does not follow that the state has the power to prevent children from
hearing or saying anything without their parents’ prior consent. The
latter would mean, for example, that it could be made criminal to admit
persons under 18 to a political rally without their parents’ prior written
consent—even a political rally in support of laws against corporal
punishment of children, or laws in favor of greater rights for minors.
And what is good for First Amendment rights of speech must be good
for First Amendment rights of religion as well: It could be made crimi
nal to admit a person under 18 to church, or to give a person under 18 a
religious tract, without his parents’ prior consent. Our point is not, as
JUSTICE THOMAS believes, post, at 16, n. 2, merely that such laws are
“undesirable.” They are obviously an infringement upon the religious
freedom of young people and those who wish to proselytize young
people. Such laws do not enforce parental authority over children’s
speech and religion; they impose governmental authority, subject only

