10

BROWN v. ENTERTAINMENT MERCHANTS ASSN.
ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

limited to the sale or rental of violent video games to
minors. The California law imposes no restriction on the
creation of violent video games, or on the possession of
such games by anyone, whether above or below the age of
18. The California law does not regulate the sale or rental
of violent games by adults. And the California law does
not prevent parents and certain other close relatives from
buying or renting violent games for their children or other
young relatives if they see fit.
Second, Stevens does not support the proposition that a
law like the one at issue must satisfy strict scrutiny. The
portion of Stevens on which the Court relies rejected the
Government’s contention that depictions of animal cruelty
were categorically outside the range of any First Amend
ment protection. 559 U. S., at __ (slip op., at 5). Going
well beyond Stevens, the Court now holds that any law
that attempts to prevent minors from purchasing violent
video games must satisfy strict scrutiny instead of the
more lenient standard applied in Ginsberg, 390 U. S. 629,
our most closely related precedent. As a result of today’s
decision, a State may prohibit the sale to minors of what
Ginsberg described as “girlie magazines,” but a State must
surmount a formidable (and perhaps insurmountable)
obstacle if it wishes to prevent children from purchasing
the most violent and depraved video games imaginable.
Third, Stevens expressly left open the possibility that a
more narrowly drawn statute targeting depictions of
animal cruelty might be compatible with the First
Amendment. See 559 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 19). In this
case, the Court’s sweeping opinion will likely be read by
many, both inside and outside the video-game industry, as
suggesting that no regulation of minors’ access to violent
video games is allowed—at least without supporting evi
dence that may not be realistically obtainable given the
nature of the phenomenon in question.

