8

BROWN v. ENTERTAINMENT MERCHANTS ASSN.
Opinion of the Court

California’s argument would fare better if there were a
longstanding tradition in this country of specially restrict
ing children’s access to depictions of violence, but there is
none. Certainly the books we give children to read—or
read to them when they are younger—contain no shortage
of gore. Grimm’s Fairy Tales, for example, are grim in
deed. As her just deserts for trying to poison Snow White,
the wicked queen is made to dance in red hot slippers “till
she fell dead on the floor, a sad example of envy and jeal
ousy.” The Complete Brothers Grimm Fairy Tales 198
(2006 ed.). Cinderella’s evil stepsisters have their eyes
pecked out by doves. Id., at 95. And Hansel and Gretel
(children!) kill their captor by baking her in an oven. Id.,
at 54.
High-school reading lists are full of similar fare.
Homer’s Odysseus blinds Polyphemus the Cyclops by
grinding out his eye with a heated stake. The Odyssey of
Homer, Book IX, p. 125 (S. Butcher & A. Lang transls.
1909) (“Even so did we seize the fiery-pointed brand and
whirled it round in his eye, and the blood flowed about the
heated bar. And the breath of the flame singed his eyelids
and brows all about, as the ball of the eye burnt away, and
the roots thereof crackled in the flame”). In the Inferno,
Dante and Virgil watch corrupt politicians struggle to stay
submerged beneath a lake of boiling pitch, lest they be
skewered by devils above the surface. Canto XXI, pp.
187–189 (A. Mandelbaum transl. Bantam Classic ed.
1982). And Golding’s Lord of the Flies recounts how a
schoolboy called Piggy is savagely murdered by other
—————— 

to a parental veto. In the absence of any precedent for state control, 

uninvited by the parents, over a child’s speech and religion (JUSTICE

THOMAS cites none), and in the absence of any justification for such

control that would satisfy strict scrutiny, those laws must be unconsti

tutional. This argument is not, as JUSTICE THOMAS asserts, “circular,” 

ibid. It is the absence of any historical warrant or compelling justifica

tion for such restrictions, not our ipse dixit, that renders them invalid. 


