Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

Opinion of the Court

are qualitatively different from other portrayals of vio
lence. The California Legislature is perfectly willing to
leave this dangerous, mind-altering material in the hands
of children so long as one parent (or even an aunt or uncle)
says it’s OK. And there are not even any requirements as
to how this parental or avuncular relationship is to be
verified; apparently the child’s or putative parent’s, aunt’s,
or uncle’s say-so suffices. That is not how one addresses a
serious social problem.
California claims that the Act is justified in aid of pa
rental authority: By requiring that the purchase of violent
video games can be made only by adults, the Act ensures
that parents can decide what games are appropriate. At
the outset, we note our doubts that punishing third parties
for conveying protected speech to children just in case
their parents disapprove of that speech is a proper gov
ernmental means of aiding parental authority. Accepting
that position would largely vitiate the rule that “only in
relatively narrow and well-defined circumstances may
government bar public dissemination of protected materi
als to [minors].” Erznoznik, 422 U. S., at 212–213.
But leaving that aside, California cannot show that the
Act’s restrictions meet a substantial need of parents who
wish to restrict their children’s access to violent video
games but cannot do so. The video-game industry has in
place a voluntary rating system designed to inform con
sumers about the content of games. The system, imple
mented by the Entertainment Software Rating Board
(ESRB), assigns age-specific ratings to each video game
submitted: EC (Early Childhood); E (Everyone); E10+
(Everyone 10 and older); T (Teens); M (17 and older); and
AO (Adults Only—18 and older). App. 86. The Video
Software Dealers Association encourages retailers to
prominently display information about the ESRB system
in their stores; to refrain from renting or selling adults
only games to minors; and to rent or sell “M” rated games

