6

BROWN v. ENTERTAINMENT MERCHANTS ASSN.
ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

inherent in the open-ended term ‘patently offensive’ ”).3
By contrast, the threshold requirement of the California
law does not perform the narrowing function served by the
limitation in Miller. At least when Miller was decided,
depictions of “hard core” sexual conduct were not a com
mon feature of mainstream entertainment. But nothing
similar can be said about much of the conduct covered by
the California law. It provides that a video game cannot
qualify as “violent” unless “the range of options available
to a player includes killing, maiming, dismembering, or
sexually assaulting an image of a human being.”
§1746(d)(1).
For better or worse, our society has long regarded many
depictions of killing and maiming4 as suitable features of
popular entertainment, including entertainment that is
widely available to minors. The California law’s threshold
requirement would more closely resemble the limitation in
Miller if it targeted a narrower class of graphic depictions.
Because of this feature of the California law’s threshold
test, the work of providing fair notice is left in large part
to the three requirements that follow, but those elements
are also not up to the task. In drafting the violent video
game law, the California Legislature could have made its
own judgment regarding the kind and degree of violence
that is acceptable in games played by minors (or by minors
in particular age groups). Instead, the legislature relied
on undefined societal or community standards.
——————
3 The provision of New York law under which the petitioner was con
victed in Ginsberg was framed with similar specificity. This provision
applied to depictions of “nudity” and “sexual conduct,” and both those
terms were specifically and unambiguously defined. See 390 U. S., at
645–647 (Appendix A to opinion of the Court).
4 The California law does not define the term “maiming,” nor has the
State cited any decisions from its courts that define the term in this
context. Accordingly, I take the term to have its ordinary meaning,
which includes the infliction of any serious wound, see Webster’s Third
New International Dictionary 1362 (2002) (hereinafter Webster’s).

