Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

19

THOMAS, J., dissenting

III
The California law at issue here prohibits the sale or
rental of “violent video game[s]” to minors, defined as
anyone “under 18 years of age.” Cal. Civ. Code Ann.
§§1746.1(a), 1746 (West 2009). A violation of the law is
punishable by a civil fine of up to $1,000. §1746.3. Criti
cally, the law does not prohibit adults from buying or
renting violent video games for a minor or prohibit minors
from playing such games. Cf. ante, at 10 (ALITO, J., con
curring in judgment); post, at 10 (BREYER, J., dissenting).
The law also does not restrict a “minor’s parent, grandpar
ent, aunt, uncle, or legal guardian” from selling or renting
him a violent video game. §1746.1(c).
Respondents, associations of companies in the video
game industry, brought a preenforcement challenge to
California’s law, claiming that on its face the law violates
the free speech rights of their members. The Court holds
that video games are speech for purposes of the First
Amendment and finds the statute facially unconstitu
tional. See ante, at 2–3, 11–17. I disagree.
Under any of this Court’s standards for a facial First
Amendment challenge, this one must fail. The video game
associations cannot show “that no set of circumstances
exists under which [the law] would be valid,” “that
the statute lacks any plainly legitimate sweep,” or that
“a substantial number of its applications are unconstitu
tional, judged in relation to the statute’s plainly legitimate
sweep.” Stevens, 559 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 10) (internal
quotation marks omitted). Even assuming that video
games are speech, in most applications the California law
does not implicate the First Amendment. All that the law
does is prohibit the direct sale or rental of a violent video
game to a minor by someone other than the minor’s par
ent, grandparent, aunt, uncle, or legal guardian. Where a
minor has a parent or guardian, as is usually true, the law
does not prevent that minor from obtaining a violent video

