12

BROWN v. ENTERTAINMENT MERCHANTS ASSN.
ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

the Court note, as JUSTICE BREYER points out, see post, at
11 (dissenting opinion), that many parents today are
simply not able to monitor their children’s use of com
puters and gaming devices.
C
Finally, the Court is far too quick to dismiss the possi
bility that the experience of playing video games (and the
effects on minors of playing violent video games) may be
very different from anything that we have seen before.
Any assessment of the experience of playing video games
must take into account certain characteristics of the video
games that are now on the market and those that are
likely to be available in the near future.
Today’s most advanced video games create realistic
alternative worlds in which millions of players immerse
themselves for hours on end. These games feature visual
imagery and sounds that are strikingly realistic, and in
the near future video-game graphics may be virtually
indistinguishable from actual video footage.7 Many of the
games already on the market can produce high definition
images,8 and it is predicted that it will not be long before
video-game images will be seen in three dimensions.9 It is
also forecast that video games will soon provide sensory
——————
7 See Chayka, Visual Games: Photorealism in Crisis, Kill Screen (May
2011), http://killscreendaily.com/articles/visual-games-photorealism-crisis.
8 To see brief video excerpts from games with highly realistic graph
ics, see Spike TV Video Game Awards 2010—Game of the Year Nomi
nees, GameTrailers.com (Dec. 10, 2010), http://www.gametrailers.com/
video/game-of-spike-tv-vga/707755?type=flv.
9 See Selleck, Sony PS3 Launching 50 3D-Capable Video Games in
the Near Future, SlashGear (Nov. 23, 2010), http://www.slashgear.com/
sony-ps3-launching-50-3d-capable-video-games-in-the-near-future-23115866;
Sofge, Why 3D Doesn’t Work for TV, But Is Great for Gaming, Popular Mechanics (Mar. 11, 2010), http://www.popularmechanics.com/
technology/digital/gaming/4342437.

