14

BROWN v. ENTERTAINMENT MERCHANTS ASSN.
BREYER, J., dissenting

cognition, and aggressive affect,” and that “playing violent
video games is a causal risk factor for long-term harmful
outcomes.” Anderson et al., Violent Video Game Effects on
Aggression, Empathy, and Prosocial Behavior in Eastern
and Western Countries: A Meta-Analytic Review, 136
Psychological Bulletin 151, 167, 169 (2010) (emphasis
added).
Some of these studies take care to explain in a commonsense way why video games are potentially more harmful
than, say, films or books or television. In essence, they
say that the closer a child’s behavior comes, not to watch­
ing, but to acting out horrific violence, the greater the
potential psychological harm. See Bushman & Hues­
mann, Aggression, in 2 Handbook of Social Pscyhology
833, 851 (S. Fiske, D. Gilbert, & G. Lindzey eds., 5th ed.
2010) (video games stimulate more aggression because
“[p]eople learn better when they are actively involved,”
players are “more likely to identify with violent charac­
ters,” and “violent games directly reward violent behav­
ior”); Polman, de Castro, & van Aken, Experimental Study
of the Differential Effects of Playing Versus Watching
Violent Video Games on Children’s Aggressive Behavior,
34 Aggressive Behavior 256 (2008) (finding greater ag­
gression resulting from playing, as opposed to watching, a
violent game); C. Anderson, D. Gentile, & K. Buckley,
Violent Video Game Effects on Children and Adolescents
136–137 (2007) (three studies finding greater effects from
games as opposed to television). See also infra, at 15–16
(statements of expert public health associations agreeing
that interactive games can be more harmful than “passive”
media like television); ante, at 12–17 (ALITO, J., concur­
ring in judgment).
Experts debate the conclusions of all these studies. Like
many, perhaps most, studies of human behavior, each
study has its critics, and some of those critics have pro­
duced studies of their own in which they reach different

