Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2009)

3

SCALIA, J., dissenting

disposition, a sort of ersatz summary reversal. We do not
say that the judgment below was wrong, but since we
suspect that it may be wrong and do not want to waste our
time figuring it out, we instruct the Court of Appeals to do
the job again, with a particular issue prominently in mind.
It surely suggests something is amiss that this case
would be over, and petitioner would be worse off, if he had
asked us to reverse the judgment below on the basis of
Jimenez. Since he did not argue that ground to the Court
of Appeals, and since that court did not address it, we
would almost certainly deny certiorari. See Adarand
Constructors, Inc. v. Mineta, 534 U. S. 103, 108–109 (2001)
(per curiam) (dismissing a writ as improvidently granted
because the question at issue was not raised or considered
below). Have we established a new system in which a
party’s repetition before this Court of his failure below
(here, the failure to invoke Jimenez) cures—and causes us
to reward—his earlier failure? Or perhaps we are develop
ing a new system in which all arguably valid points not
raised and not discussed below—whether or not belatedly
raised here—will be sent back for a redo by the Court of
Appeals. And if we can apply this failure-friendly practice
to a neglected precedent two months old, there is no rea
son in principle not to apply it to a neglected precedent
two years old.
In my view we have no power to set aside the duly re
corded judgments of lower courts unless we find them to
be in error, or unless they are cast in doubt by a factor
arising after they were rendered. The GVR for considera
tion of a day’s old Supreme Court case is already a techni
cal violation of sound practice and should not be extended
further. Since we review judgments rather than opinions,
a lower court’s failure to discuss a pre-existing factor it
should have discussed is no basis for reversal. Once we
disregard the logic (and the attendant limits) of “interven
ing-factor” GVRs, they metastasize into today’s monster.

