2

WEBSTER v. COOPER
SCALIA, J., dissenting

the time allowed to seek direct appeal, even if the state
court allows an out-of-time appeal during state collateral
review. Id., at ___ –___ (slip op., at 8). The parties do not
agree, and it is not clear, whether under Louisiana law
petitioner’s motion to vacate would be regarded as restart
ing the clock for his direct appeal. If so, then the Jimenez
error is obvious; if not, there is no error. Today, without
request by (or even warning to) the parties, the Court
grants certiorari, vacates the Fifth Circuit’s judgment
without determination of the merits, and remands for
further consideration in light of Jimenez.
I certainly agree that we have the power to GVR “where
an intervening factor has arisen that has a legal bearing
upon the decision.” Lawrence v. Chater, 516 U. S. 163,
191–192 (1996) (SCALIA, J., dissenting). The purpose of
such an “intervening-factor” GVR is to give the court to
which we remand the first opportunity to consider the
factor—in this case a new decision of ours. Though we
have sometimes GVR’d in light of decisions that preceded
the decision vacated, see, e.g., Grier v. United States, 419
U. S. 989 (1974), I have acquiesced in this expansion of
“intervening-factor” GVRs only when (as in Grier) our
decision came so soon before the judgment in question
“that the lower court might have been unaware of it.”
Lawrence, supra, at 181 (SCALIA, J., dissenting). This is
not such a case: We decided Jimenez on January 13, 2009,
more than two months before the Fifth Circuit denied the
certificate. There is thus no basis for regarding that deci
sion as an “intervening” factor—that is, one that the Court
of Appeals did not have before it.
This is not, of course, the first time the Court has GVR’d
on the basis of a case decided long before the Court of
Appeals ruled, see, e.g., Robinson v. Story, 469 U. S. 1081
(1984) (three months), nor the first time I have protested,
see Lawrence, supra, at 184 (SCALIA, J., dissenting) (more
than a year). This practice has created a new mode of

