Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of the Court

ning point in establishing that vehicle flight presents a
serious potential risk of physical injury to another.
Another consideration is a comparison to the crime of
burglary. Burglary is dangerous because it can end in
confrontation leading to violence. Id., at 200. The same is
true of vehicle flight, but to an even greater degree. The
attempt to elude capture is a direct challenge to an offi
cer’s authority. It is a provocative and dangerous act that
dares, and in a typical case requires, the officer to give
chase. The felon’s conduct gives the officer reason to
believe that the defendant has something more serious
than a traffic violation to hide. In Sykes’ case, officers
pursued a man with two prior violent felony convictions
and marijuana in his possession. In other cases officers
may discover more about the violent potential of the flee
ing suspect by running a check on the license plate or by
recognizing the fugitive as a convicted felon. See, e.g.,
Arizona v. Gant, 556 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (slip op., at 2).
Because an accepted way to restrain a driver who poses
dangers to others is through seizure, officers pursuing
fleeing drivers may deem themselves duty bound to esca
late their response to ensure the felon is apprehended.
Scott v. Harris, 550 U. S. 372, 385 (2007), rejected the
possibility that police could eliminate the danger from a
vehicle flight by giving up the chase because the perpetra
tor “might have been just as likely to respond by continu
ing to drive recklessly as by slowing down and wiping his
brow.” And once the pursued vehicle is stopped, it is
sometimes necessary for officers to approach with guns
drawn to effect arrest. Confrontation with police is the
expected result of vehicle flight. It places property and
persons at serious risk of injury.
Risk of violence is inherent to vehicle flight. Between
the confrontations that initiate and terminate the inci
dent, the intervening pursuit creates high risks of crashes.
It presents more certain risk as a categorical matter than

