(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is being
done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

SYKES v. UNITED STATES
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–11311.

Argued January 12, 2011—Decided June 9, 2011

When he pleaded guilty to being a felon in possession of a firearm, see 8
U. S. C. §922(g)(1), petitioner Sykes had prior convictions for at least
three felonies, including the state-law crime of “us[ing] a vehicle” to
“knowingly or intentionally” “fle[e] from a law enforcement officer”
after being ordered to stop, Ind. Code §35–44–3–3(b)(1)(A) (2004).
The Federal District Court decided that the prior convictions sub
jected Sykes to the 15-year mandatory minimum prison term that the
Armed Career Criminal Act (ACCA), 18 U. S. C. §924(e), provides for
an armed defendant who has three prior “violent felony” convictions.
Rejecting Sykes’ argument that his vehicle flight felony was not “vio
lent” under ACCA, the Seventh Circuit affirmed.
Held: Felony vehicle flight, as proscribed by Indiana law, is a violent
felony for purposes of ACCA. Pp. 5–14.
(a) The “categorical approach” used to determine if a particular
crime is a violent felony “consider[s] whether the elements of the of
fense are of the type that would justify its inclusion within the resid
ual provision [of 18 U. S. C. §924(e)(2)(B)], without inquiring into the
specific conduct of th[e] particular offender.” James v. United States,
550 U. S. 192, 202 (emphasis deleted). When punishable by more
than one year in prison, burglary, arson, extortion, and crimes that
involve use of explosives are violet felonies. Under the residual
clause in question so too is a crime that “otherwise involves conduct
that presents a serious potential risk of physical injury to another,”
§924(e)(2)(B)(ii), i.e., a risk “comparable to that posed by its closest
analog among” the statute’s enumerated offenses. Id., at 203. When
a perpetrator flees police in a car, his determination to elude capture
makes a lack of concern for the safety of others an inherent part of
the offense. Even if he drives without going full speed or the wrong

