8

SYKES v. UNITED STATES
KAGAN, J., dissenting

And at the very beginning of this series is subsection
(b)(1)(A), the offense of which Sykes was convicted.
That placement alters the nature of the analysis. We
have previously examined the way statutory provisions
relate to each other to determine whether a particular
provision counts as a violent felony under ACCA. In
Chambers, 555 U. S., at 126–127, we considered an Illinois
statute prohibiting within a single section several differ
ent kinds of behavior, including escape from a penal insti
tution and failure to report to a penal institution. The
courts below had treated the statute as defining a single
crime of felonious escape and held that crime to qualify as
a violent felony under ACCA. See id., at 125; United
States v. Chambers, 473 F. 3d 724, 725–726 (CA7 2007).
We disagreed, stating that failure to report was a distinct
offense, which did not meet ACCA’s requirements. That
was so, we stated, because “[t]he behavior that likely
underlies a failure to report would seem less likely to
involve a risk of physical harm than the less passive, more
aggressive behavior underlying an escape from custody.”
Chambers, 555 U. S., at 127. In addition, we noted, the
statute “list[ed] escape and failure to report separately
(in its title and its body).” Ibid. We thus considered
the failure-to-report clause in its statutory context—as
one part of a legislature’s delineation of related criminal
offenses—to determine whether the behavior it encom
passed ordinarily poses a serious risk of injury.
That same focus on statutory structure resolves this
case, because it reveals subsection (b)(1)(A) to aim at a
single form—the least serious form—of vehicular flight.
Remember: Indiana has made a purposeful choice to di
vide the full spectrum of vehicular flight into different
—————— 

thus underscore that Indiana has divided the world of vehicular flight

into discrete, ascending crimes, rather than treating all vehicular flight 

as of a piece. 


