6

SYKES v. UNITED STATES
KAGAN, J., dissenting

spond immediately to a police officer’s signal? The Gov
ernment has not presented any empirical evidence ad
dressing this question, and such evidence may not in fact
exist.4 See Wells & Falcone, Research on Police Pursuits:
Advantages of Multiple Data Collection Strategies, 20
Policing Int’l J. Police Strategies & Management 729
(1997) (“Collecting valid and reliable data on policing
activities is a perennial problem . . . . This is particularly
true when studying . . . vehicle pursuits”); cf. Begay, 553
U. S., at 154 (SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment) (“Need
less to say, we do not have these relevant statistics”). But
the majority’s intuition that dangerous flights outstrip
mere failures to stop—that the aggravated form of the
activity is also the ordinary form—seems consistent with
common sense and experience. So that judgment, even
though unsupported by data, would likely be sufficient to
justify the Court’s conclusion were subsection (b)(1)(A) the
only relevant provision.
But subsection (b)(1)(A) does not stand alone, and the
context of the provision casts a different light on it. Like a
great many States (45 by my count), Indiana divides the
——————
4 The Government offers anecdotal examples and statistical surveys
of vehicular flights, see Brief for United States 13–15, 17–22, but none
helps to answer whether the “ordinary” case of vehicular flight is
aggravated or simple. Cf. ante, at 4–6 (SCALIA, J., dissenting). The an
ecdotes and all but one of the surveys demonstrate only that some
vehicular flights result in serious injury, a proposition no one does or
could dispute. The single statistical study cited by the Government
that posits an injury rate for vehicular flight concludes that about 4% of
7,737 reported police pursuits harmed police or bystanders. But that
study may well involve only aggravated flights. See C. Lum & G.
Fachner, Police Pursuits in an Age of Innovation and Reform 55 (2008)
(noting that the study relies on voluntary and non-systematic reporting
and that participating police departments might not have reported
“informal” incidents). And even assuming the study is comprehensive,
it is entirely consistent with the possibility that the “ordinary case”—
i.e., the most common form—of vehicular flight is mere failure to stop,
which produces a much lower rate of injury.

