Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

SCALIA, J., dissenting

Supreme Court briefs are an inappropriate place to
develop the key facts in a case. We normally give parties
more robust protection, leaving important factual ques
tions to district courts and juries aided by expert wit
nesses and the procedural protections of discovery. See
Fed. Rule Crim. Proc. 16(a)(1)(F), (G); Fed. Rules Evid.
702–703, 705. An adversarial process in the trial courts
can identify flaws in the methodology of the studies that
the parties put forward; here, we accept the studies’ find
ings on faith, without examining their methodology at all.
The Court does not examine, for example, whether the
police-pursuit data on which it relies is a representative
sample of all vehicular flights. The data may be skewed
towards the rare and riskier forms of flight. See post, at 6,
n. 4 (KAGAN, J., dissenting). We also have no way of
knowing how many injuries reported in that data would
have occurred even absent pursuit, by a driver who was
driving recklessly even before the police gave chase.
Similar questions undermine confidence in the burglary
and arson data the Court cites. For example, the Court
relies on a U. S. Fire Administration dataset to conclude
that 3.3 injuries occur per 100 arsons. See ante, at 9. But
a 2001 report from the same U. S. Fire Administration
suggests that roughly 1 injury occurs per 100 arsons. See
Arson in the United States, Vol. 1 Topical Fire Research
Series, No. 8, pp. 1–2 (rev. Dec. 2001), online at
http://www.usfa.dhs.gov/downloads/pdf/tfrs/v1i8-508.pdf
(as visited May 27, 2011, and available in Clerk of Court’s
case file). The Court does not reveal why it chose one
dataset over another. In sum, our statistical analysis in
ACCA cases is untested judicial factfinding masquerading
as statutory interpretation. Most of the statistics on
which the Court relies today come from government
funded studies, and did not make an appearance in this
litigation until the Government’s merits brief to this
Court. See Brief for Petitioner 17; see also Chambers,

