Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

KAGAN, J., dissenting

degrees, based on the danger associated with a driver’s
conduct. Once again, starting with the most serious con
duct: flight resulting in death; flight resulting in physical
injury; flight creating a substantial risk of physical injury; flight. That last category—flight—almost screams to
have the word “mere” placed before it. Under the In
diana statute, flight—the conduct prohibited by subsection
(b)(1)(A)—is what is left over when no aggravating factor
causing substantial risk or harm exists. Put on blinders,
and the subsection is naturally understood to address all
flight, up to and including the most dangerous kinds. But
take off those blinders—view the statute as a whole—and
the subsection is instead seen to target failures to stop.
In this vein, the distinction between subsections
(b)(1)(A) and (b)(1)(B) is especially telling. As noted,
subsection (b)(1)(B) prohibits vehicular flight that “creates
a substantial risk of bodily injury to another person.”
That language almost precisely tracks the phrasing of
ACCA’s residual clause, which refers to conduct that
“presents a serious potential risk of physical injury to
another.” 18 U. S. C. §924(e)(2)(B)(ii). This correspon
dence indicates that the conduct criminalized under sub
section (b)(1)(B) qualifies as a violent felony under ACCA.
But subsection (b)(1)(A) lacks the very feature that makes
subsection (b)(1)(B) and ACCA such a perfect match: It
does not require any behavior that poses serious risk to
others. This difference in statutory elements indicates
that subsection (b)(1)(B)—but not subsection (b)(1)(A)—is
directed toward the conduct described in ACCA’s residual
clause. To count both as ACCA offenses is to pay insuffi
cient heed to the way the Indiana Legislature drafted its
statute—as a series of escalating offenses, ranging from
the simple to the most aggravated.8
——————
8 None of this is to deny that prosecutors may sometimes charge vio
lent and dangerous offenders under subsection (b)(1)(A). A prosecutor

