Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

KAGAN, J., dissenting

to determine whether the crime involved is “characteristic
of the armed career criminal”—or otherwise said, whether
the prohibited conduct is of a kind that “makes more likely
that an offender, later possessing a gun, will use that gun
deliberately to harm a victim.” Begay, 553 U. S., at 145 (in
ternal quotation marks omitted).
Under this approach, some vehicular flight offenses
should count as violent felonies under ACCA. Consider,
for example, a statute that makes it a crime to “willfully
flee from a law enforcement officer by driving at high
speed or otherwise demonstrating reckless disregard for
the safety of others.” Such a statute, by its terms, encom
passes conduct that ordinarily “presents a serious poten
tial risk of physical injury to another.” §924(e)(2)(B)(ii).
And the covered conduct qualifies as “purposeful, violent,
and aggressive.” Id., at 145. When a motorist responds to
an officer’s signal to stop by increasing his speed or taking
reckless evasive action, he turns his car into a weapon and
provokes confrontation. In so doing, he engages in behav
ior “roughly similar, in kind as well as in degree of risk
posed,” to that involved in ACCA’s enumerated offenses—
the sort of conduct, in other words, “typically committed
by . . . ‘armed career criminals.’ ” Id., at 143, 146. Like the
majority, see ante, at 9–10, I therefore would classify
crimes of this type—call them aggravated vehicular flight
offenses—as violent felonies under ACCA.
But a vehicular flight offense need not target aggressive
and dangerous behavior. Imagine the converse of the
statute described above—a statute making it a crime to
“willfully flee from a law enforcement officer without
driving at high speed or otherwise demonstrating reckless
disregard for the safety of others.” That hypothetical
statute addresses only simple vehicular flight: mere dis
regard of a police officer’s directive to stop, devoid of addi
tional conduct creating risk to others. This behavior—
often called “failure to stop”—is illegal in most States

