10

SYKES v. UNITED STATES

KAGAN, J., dissenting 


II 

The Court does not deny that a State’s decision to divide
a generic form of conduct (like vehicular flight) into sep
arate, escalating crimes may make a difference under
ACCA; rather, the Court declines to address that question.
See ante, at 13. The Court rejects the structural argument
here for one, and only one, reason. Indiana, the majority says, “treats violations of subsections (b)(1)(A) and
(b)(1)(B) as crimes of the same magnitude”: They are both
class D felonies carrying the same punishment.9 See also
——————
may elect to use a lower grade of vehicular flight when he could use a
higher one, either as a matter of discretion or because the defendant
entered into a plea bargain. This case provides one example, see ante,
at 4 (majority opinion), and JUSTICE THOMAS offers several others, see
ante, at 6–7. But as everyone agrees, what matters in determining
whether an offense qualifies under ACCA’s residual clause is the
“ordinary case” of conviction. And in the absence of reliable empirical
evidence, the structure of the Indiana statute provides the best way to
discern the ordinary case under each subsection.
9 The Government spurns the structural argument on a different
ground, contending that subsection (b)(1)(A) is not a lesser included
offense of subsection (b)(1)(B). The Court wisely does not accept this
claim. Both subsections (b)(1)(A) and (b)(1)(B) involve the use of a
vehicle to flee, with subsection (b)(1)(B) additionally requiring that this
use “creat[e] a substantial risk of bodily injury.” So a fleeing driver
who violates subsection (b)(1)(B) necessarily runs afoul of subsection
(b)(1)(A) as well. The Government contends, in response, that a person
can violate subsection (b)(1)(B) and not (b)(1)(A) by engaging in conduct
other than vehicular flight. See Brief for United States 48–49, n. 11.
That is because subsection (b)(1)(B) additionally prohibits “obstruct
[ing]” or “resist[ing]” a police officer by a variety of means, including
through use of a vehicle. But Indiana law makes clear that subsec
tion (b)(1)(A) still counts as a lesser included offense of subsection
(b)(1)(B) in any prosecution involving vehicular flight. See Wright v.
State, 658 N. E. 2d 563, 566–567 (Ind. 1995) (holding a crime to be a
lesser included offense if its elements are “factually” subsumed within
another offense). And even if that were not the case, it should make no
difference. The meaningful question for purposes of ACCA is whether
subsection (b)(1)(B)’s prohibition of aggravated vehicular flight indi
cates that subsection (b)(1)(A) targets simple vehicular flight. That a

