6

SYKES v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

does not meet the requirements of clause (i), and it is not
among the specific offenses named in clause (ii). Thus, it
is violent under this statutory scheme only if it fits within
the so-called residual provision of clause (ii). To be a vio
lent crime, it must be an offense that “otherwise involves conduct that presents a serious potential risk of
physical injury to another.”
The question, then, is whether Indiana’s prohibition on
flight from an officer by driving a vehicle—the violation of
Indiana law for which Sykes sustained his earlier convic
tion—falls within the residual clause because, as a cate
gorical matter, it presents a serious potential risk of
physical injury to another. The offenses enumerated in
§924(e)(2)(B)(ii)—burglary, extortion, arson, and crimes
involving use of explosives—provide guidance in making
this determination. For instance, a crime involves the
requisite risk when “the risk posed by [the crime in ques
tion] is comparable to that posed by its closest analog
among the enumerated offenses.” James, 550 U. S., at 203
(explaining that attempted burglary poses risks akin to
that of completed burglary).
When a perpetrator defies a law enforcement command
by fleeing in a car, the determination to elude capture
makes a lack of concern for the safety of property and
persons of pedestrians and other drivers an inherent part
of the offense. Even if the criminal attempting to elude
capture drives without going at full speed or going the
wrong way, he creates the possibility that police will, in a
legitimate and lawful manner, exceed or almost match his
speed or use force to bring him within their custody. A
perpetrator’s indifference to these collateral consequences
has violent—even lethal—potential for others. A criminal
who takes flight and creates a risk of this dimension takes
action similar in degree of danger to that involved in
arson, which also entails intentional release of a destruc
tive force dangerous to others. This similarity is a begin

