2

SYKES v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
way, he creates the possibility that police will, in a legitimate and
lawful manner, exceed or almost match his speed or use force to bring
him within their custody. His indifference to these collateral conse
quences has violent—even lethal—potential for others. A fleeing
criminal who creates a risk of this dimension takes action similar in
degree of danger to that involved in arson, which also entails inten
tional release of a destructive force dangerous to others. Also telling
is a comparison to burglary, which is dangerous because it can end in
confrontation leading to violence. In fact, the risks associated with
vehicle flight may outstrip the dangers of both burglary and arson.
While statistics are not dispositive, studies show that the risk of per
sonal injuries is about 20% lower for each of those enumerated crimes
than for vehicle pursuits. Thus, Indiana’s prohibition on vehicle
flight falls within §924(e)(2)(B)(ii)’s residual clause because, as a
categorical matter, it presents a serious potential risk of physical in
jury to another. Pp. 5–9.
(b) Sykes’ argument—that Begay v. United States, 553 U. S. 137,
and Chambers v. United States, 555 U. S. 122, require ACCA predi
cate crimes to be purposeful, violent, and aggressive in ways that ve
hicle flight is not—overreads those opinions. In general, levels of risk
divide crimes that qualify as violent felonies from those that do not.
Chambers is no exception: It explained that failure to report does not
qualify because the typical offender is not “significantly more likely
than others to attack, or physically to resist, an apprehender.” 555
U. S., at ___–___. Begay, which held that driving under the influence
(DUI) is not an ACCA predicate and stated that it is not purposeful,
violent, and aggressive, 553 U. S., at 145–148, is the Court’s sole re
sidual clause decision in which risk was not the dispositive factor.
But Begay also gave a more specific reason for its holding: DUI “need
not be purposeful or deliberate,” id., at 145, and is analogous to
strict-liability, negligence, and recklessness crimes. Begay’s “pur
poseful, violent, and aggressive” phrase is an addition to the statu
tory text that has no precise link to the residual clause. Because ve
hicle flight is not a strict-liability, negligence, or recklessness crime
and is, as a categorical matter, similar in risk to the crimes listed in
the residual clause, it is a violent felony. Pp. 10–11
(c) Sykes contends that the fact that Ind. Code §35–44–3–3(b)(1)(B)
criminalizes flight by an offender who “operates a vehicle in a man
ner that creates a substantial risk of bodily injury to another person”
indicates that Indiana did not intend for §35–44–3–3(b)(1)(A), under
which he was convicted, to encompass the particular class of vehicle
flights reached by subsection (b)(1)(B). This argument is unconvinc
ing. Indiana treats the two subsections as felonies of the same mag
nitude carrying similar prison terms, suggesting that subsection

