4

SYKES v. UNITED STATES
KAGAN, J., dissenting

(under a wide variety of statutory provisions). In Indiana,
for example, a driver who “know[s] that a police officer
wishes to effectuate a traffic stop” may commit a felony if
he attempts to “choose the location of the stop,” rather
than pulling over immediately; it makes no difference that
the driver “did not speed or disobey any . . . traffic laws.”
Woodward v. State, 770 N. E. 2d 897, 902 (Ind. App.
2002).2 But a mere failure to stop does not usually “pre
sen[t] a serious potential risk of physical injury to an
other,” §924(e)(2)(B)(ii), any more than normal driving
does. Nor is this conduct “violent . . . and aggressive.”
Begay, 553 U. S., at 145; see Brief for United States 43
(characterizing as “nonviolent” a flight from police that
complies with “all traffic laws”). True, the offender is
ignoring a command he should obey. But nothing in his
behavior is affirmatively belligerent: It does not “show an
increased likelihood that [he] is the kind of person who
might deliberately point the gun and pull the trigger.”
Begay, 553 U. S., at 146.3 And so, under our precedents, a
statute criminalizing only simple vehicular flight would
not fall within ACCA’s residual clause. I do not under
——————
2 The majority attempts to show that Woodward involved conduct
more risky and violent than a simple failure to stop. See ante, at 3; see
also ante, at 7 (THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment). But the facts of
that case, like the facts of this one, are irrelevant. Under ACCA, all
that matters is the elements of the offense, and the Indiana Court of
Appeals held in Woodward that a person who “merely fail[s] to stop” for
police, and does nothing more, commits a felony under state law. 770
N. E. 2d, at 900–902.
3 Indeed, a driver may refrain from pulling over immediately out of
concern for his own safety. He may worry, for example, that road con
ditions make it hazardous to stop. Or a driver may fear that the
person initiating the stop is a criminal rather than a police officer. See,
e.g., Brennan, Rapist to Spend Life in Prison, Tampa Tribune, Feb. 18,
2011, Metro section, p. 3 (“[A man] impersonating a police officer . . .
used the ruse to pull over a woman . . . and then kidnap and rape her”);
DeKunder, Watch for “Fake” Police, Local Authorities Warn, Northeast
Herald, Jan. 14, 2010, pp. 12, 13 (noting several similar incidents).

