12

SYKES v. UNITED STATES
THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment

ment statute confirms that its other provisions do not
reserve §3(b)(1)(A) for nonrisky conduct. An intentional
vehicular flight becomes a class C felony if the vehicle is
operated “in a manner that causes serious bodily injury.”
Ind. Code §35–44–3–3(b)(2). The same act becomes a class
B felony if someone is killed. §35–44–3–3(b)(3).3 JUSTICE
KAGAN asserts that each of these “separate, escalating
crimes” captures an increasing degree of risk and neces
sarily means that §3(b)(1)(A), the offense simpliciter, is
less risky than it otherwise seems. Post, at 7.
The flaw in this reasoning is that §§3(b)(2) and (3) en
hance punishment based solely on the results of the flight,
not the degree of risk it posed. Neither provision requires
any action by a suspect beyond that which satisfies the
elements of §3(b)(1)(A).4 Rather, each provision addresses
what happens when the risk inherent in a violation of
§3(b)(1)(A) is actualized and someone is hurt or killed.
The risk of physical injury inherent in intentional vehicu
lar flight simpliciter was apparently clear enough to spur
the Indiana Legislature to specify greater penalties for the
inevitable occasions when physical injury actually occurs.
By comparison, for obviously nonrisky felonies like insur
ance fraud or misappropriation of escrow funds, legisla
tures do not specify what additional punishment is war
ranted when the crime kills or injures bystanders or
police. See, e.g., Ind. Code §35–43–5–7.2; §35–43–9–7. In
sum, §§3(b)(2) and (3) do not demonstrate that §3(b)(1)(A)
is less risky than it otherwise seems, but instead support
the idea that it is inherently risky.
——————
3 Indiana recently added that if a police officer dies, it becomes a class
A felony. 2010 Ind. Acts p. 1197.
4 For that matter, each provision also could be satisfied by a flight
that did not satisfy §3(b)(1)(B), which casts further doubt on JUSTICE
KAGAN’s vision of the statutory scheme as a unified structure of neatly
progressing offenses with corresponding risk levels and punishments.
See post, at 7.

