Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

SCALIA, J., dissenting

“Today’s opinion,” I wrote, “permits an unintelligible crim
inal statute to survive uncorrected, unguided, and unex
plained.” Id., at 230–231.
My assessment has not been changed by the Court’s
later decisions in the ACCA “series.” Today’s opinion,
which adds to the “closest analog” test (James) the “pur
poseful, violent, and aggressive” test (Begay), and even the
risky-as-the-least-risky test that I had proposed as the
exclusive criterion, has not made the statute’s applica
tion clear and predictable. And all of them together—or
even the risky-as-the-least-risky test alone, I am now
convinced—never will. The residual-clause series will be
endless, and we will be doing ad hoc application of ACCA
to the vast variety of state criminal offenses until the cows
come home.
That does not violate the Constitution. What does vio
late the Constitution is approving the enforcement of a
sentencing statute that does not “give a person of ordinar
ily intelligence fair notice” of its reach, United States v.
Batchelder, 442 U. S. 114, 123 (1979) (internal quotation
marks omitted), and that permits, indeed invites, arbi
trary enforcement, see Kolender, 461 U. S., at 357. The
Court’s ever-evolving interpretation of the residual clause
will keep defendants and judges guessing for years to
come. The reality is that the phrase “otherwise involves
conduct that presents a serious potential risk of physical
injury to another” does not clearly define the crimes that
will subject defendants to the greatly increased ACCA
penalties. It is not the job of this Court to impose a clarity
which the text itself does not honestly contain. And even
if that were our job, the further reality is that we have by
now demonstrated our inability to accomplish the task.
We have, I recognize, upheld hopelessly vague criminal
statutes in the past—indeed, in the recent past. See, e.g.,
Skilling v. United States, 561 U. S. ___ (2010). That is
regrettable, see id., at ___ (SCALIA, J., concurring in part

