12

SYKES v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

tions of subsections (b)(1)(A) and (b)(1)(B) as crimes of the
same magnitude. They are both class D felonies, and both
carry terms of between six months and three years, Ind.
Code §35–50–2–7(a). The distinction between the provi
sions is their relationship to subsection (a), which prohib
its, among other acts, much conduct in which a person
“(1) forcibly resists, obstructs, or interferes with a law en
forcement officer . . . ; (2) forcibly resists, obstructs, or
interferes with the authorized service or execution of . . .
process . . . ; or (3) flees from a law enforcement officer.”
§35–44–3–3(a). Subsection (b)(1)(A) only involves the
conduct barred by subsection (a)(3)—flight—which, it
states, is a felony whenever committed with a vehicle.
Under subsection (b)(1)(B), by contrast, any of the offenses
in subsection (a) is a felony if the offender commits it
while using a vehicle to create a substantial risk of bodily
injury to another. Taken together, the statutory incen
tives always favor prosecuting vehicle flights under sub
section (b)(1)(A) rather than subsection (b)(1)(B). They
reflect a judgment that some offenses in subsection (a) can
be committed without a vehicle or without creating sub
stantial risks. They reflect the further judgment that this
is not so for vehicle flights.
Serious and substantial risks are an inherent part of
vehicle flight. Under subsection (b)(1)(A), they need not be
proved separately to secure a conviction equal in magni
tude to those available for other forms of resisting law
enforcement with a vehicle that involve similar risks.
In other words, the “similarity in punishment for these
related, overlapping offenses suggests that [subsection
(b)(1)(A)] is the rough equivalent of one type of [subsection
(b)(1)(B)] violation.” Post, at 10 (THOMAS, J., concurring in
judgment); see also ibid., n. 2. By adding subsection
(b)(1)(A) in 1998, the Indiana Legislature determined that
subsection (b)(1)(A) by itself sufficed as a basis for the
punishments available under subsection (b)(1)(B). Post, at

