10

SYKES v. UNITED STATES
THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment

conduct.
First, apart from the existence of §3(b)(1)(B), the ab
sence of risk as an element of §3(b)(1)(A) does not mean
that the offense is not a violent felony. ACCA does not
require that a violent felony expressly include a risk of
injury as an element of the offense. Enumerated violent
felonies like arson and burglary have no such element.
Second, §3(b)(1)(B) is not a risky, aggravated version
of §3(b)(1)(A). Both are class D felonies, and at the time of
Sykes’ conviction, there was no statutory difference in
punishment between them. Even now, the offenses re
main of a single class, meriting similar punishments.
The similarity in punishment for these related, overlap
ping offenses suggests that §3(b)(1)(A) is the rough equiva
lent of one type of §3(b)(1)(B) violation. Section 3(b)(1)(B)
enhances punishments for three separate types of in
tentional misdemeanors: obstructing an officer, §3(a)(1);
interfering with service of process, §3(a)(2); and fleeing
from a police officer, §3(a)(3). Under §3(b)(1)(B), commit
ting any of those offenses while also drawing a deadly
weapon, inflicting injury, or “operat[ing] a vehicle in a
manner that creates a substantial risk of bodily injury to
another person” has long been a class D felony.
In 1998, the Indiana Legislature added §3(b)(1)(A) to
provide that any use of a vehicle to flee from an officer
under §3(a)(3) is always a class D felony.
Section
3(b)(1)(A) is, in effect, a shortcut to the same punishment
for one particular violation of §3(b)(1)(B).2 It is still the
——————
2 Indiana

law at the time of Sykes’ conviction presented two related
provisions, within a single statute, carrying the same punishment. One
was a broad provision that had risk as an element, and the other was a
narrower provision that did not. While JUSTICE KAGAN would infer that
the offense lacking risk as an element was likely not ordinarily risky,
post, at 6–8, I think it makes more sense to infer the opposite.
Consider reckless endangerment statutes. In Hawaii, for instance, it
is “reckless endangering in the second degree” either to “recklessly

