Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of the Court

ford’s murder that he “didn’t want to get caught that time
because I wanted to be able to do it again and again and
again and again.” Id., at 1699 (July 8, 1983). In a letter
written to a friend, he called the murders of Rickerson and
Warford “the finest thing I ever did in my whole life” and
expressed a wish that he “had a human submachine gun
right now so I could exterminate” black men “and watch
them scream and twitch in agony.” Id., at 1724–1725.
And he testified that, if he still had his guns, he would
escape from jail, “go out and continue the war I started,”
and “continue to inflict the maximum amount of damage
on the enemies as I am able to do.” Id., at 1780–1781.
The State replied by attempting to show that Spisak
was lying in his testimony about the Nazi-related motives
for these crimes. The State contended instead that the
shootings were motivated by less unusual purposes, such
as robbery. See id., at 1680, 1816–1818.
The defense effort to show that Spisak was not guilty by
reason of insanity foundered when the trial judge refused
to instruct the jury to consider that question and excluded
expert testimony regarding Spisak’s mental state. The
defense’s expert witness, Dr. Oscar Markey, had written a
report diagnosing Spisak as suffering from a “schizotypal
personality disorder” and an “atypical psychotic disorder,”
and as, at times, “unable to control his impulses to as
sault.” 6 id., at 1882–1883, 1992 (July 11, 1983). His
testimony was somewhat more ambiguous during a voir
dire, however. On cross-examination, he conceded that he
could not say Spisak failed Ohio’s sanity standard at the
time of the murders. After Markey made the same conces
sion before the jury, the court granted the prosecution’s
renewed motion to exclude Markey’s testimony and in
structed the jury to disregard the testimony that it heard.
And the court excluded the defense’s proffered reports
from other psychologists and psychiatrists who examined
Spisak, because none of the reports said that Spisak met

