(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

SMITH, WARDEN v. SPISAK
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SIXTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–724.

Argued October 13, 2009—Decided January 12, 2010

After the Ohio courts sentenced respondent Spisak to death and denied
his claims on direct appeal and collateral review, he filed a federal
habeas petition claiming that, at his trial’s penalty phase, (1) the in
structions and verdict forms unconstitutionally required the jury to
consider in mitigation only those factors that it unanimously found to
be mitigating, see Mills v. Maryland, 486 U. S. 367, and (2) his coun
sel’s inadequate closing argument deprived him of effective assis
tance of counsel, see Strickland v. Washington, 466 U. S. 668. The
District Court denied the petition, but the Sixth Circuit accepted both
arguments and ordered relief.
Held:
1. Because the state court’s upholding of the mitigation jury in
structions and forms was not “contrary to, or . . . an unreasonable ap
plication of, clearly established Federal law, as determined by [this]
Court,” 28 U. S. C. §2254(d)(1), the Sixth Circuit was barred from
reaching a contrary decision. The Court of Appeals erred in holding
that the instructions and forms contravened Mills, in which this
Court held that the jury instructions and verdict forms at issue vio
lated the Constitution because, read naturally, they told the jury that
it could not find a particular circumstance to be mitigating unless all
12 jurors agreed that the mitigating circumstance had been proved to
exist, 486 U. S., at 380–381, 384. Even assuming that Mills sets
forth the pertinent “clearly established Federal law” for reviewing the
state-court decision in this case, the instructions and forms used here
differ significantly from those in Mills: They made clear that, to rec
ommend a death sentence, the jury had to find unanimously that
each of the aggravating factors outweighed any mitigating circum
stances, but they did not say that the jury had to determine the exis

