2

SMITH v. SPISAK
Syllabus
tence of each individual mitigating factor unanimously. Nor did they
say anything about how—or even whether—the jury should make in
dividual determinations that each particular mitigating circumstance
existed. They focused only on the overall question of balancing the
aggravating and mitigating factors, and they repeatedly told the jury
to consider all relevant evidence. Thus, the instructions and verdict
forms did not clearly bring about, either through what they said or
what they implied, the constitutional error in the Mills instructions.
Pp. 2–9.
2. Similarly, the state-court decision rejecting Spisak’s ineffective
assistance-of-counsel claim was not “contrary to, or . . . an unreason
able application” of the law “clearly established” in Strickland.
§2254(d)(1). To prevail on this claim, Spisak must show, inter alia,
that there is a “reasonable probability that, but for counsel’s unpro
fessional errors, the result of the proceeding would have been differ
ent.” Strickland, supra, at 694. Even assuming that the closing ar
gument was inadequate in the respects claimed by Spisak, this Court
finds no “reasonable probability” that a better closing argument
without these defects would have made a significant difference. Any
different, more adequate closing argument would have taken place in
the following context: Spisak’s defense at the trial’s guilt phase con
sisted of an effort by counsel to show that Spisak was not guilty by
reason of insanity. Counsel, apparently hoping to demonstrate
Spisak’s mentally defective condition, called him to the stand, where
he freely admitted committing three murders and two other shoot
ings and repeatedly expressed an intention to commit further mur
ders if given the opportunity. In light of this background and for the
following reasons, the assumed closing argument deficiencies do not
raise the requisite reasonable probability of a different result but for
the deficient closing. First, since the sentencing phase took place
immediately after the guilt phase, the jurors had fresh in their minds
the government’s extensive and graphic evidence regarding the kill
ings, Spisak’s boastful and unrepentant confessions, and his threats
to commit further violent acts. Second, although counsel did not
summarize the mitigating evidence in great detail, he did refer to it,
and the defense experts’ more detailed testimony regarding Spisak’s
mental illness was also fresh in the jurors’ minds. Third, Spisak does
not describe what other mitigating factors counsel might have men
tioned; all those he proposes essentially consist of aspects of the
“mental defect” factor that the defense experts described. Finally, in
light of counsel’s several appeals to the jurors’ sense of humanity, it
is unlikely that a more explicit or elaborate appeal for mercy could
have changed the result, either alone or together with the foregoing
circumstances. The Court need not reach Spisak’s claim that

