10

SMITH v. SPISAK
Opinion of the Court

“not well-taken on the basis of our review of the record.”
State v. Spisak, 36 Ohio St. 3d, at 82, 521 N. E. 2d, at 802
(citing, inter alia, Strickland, supra). The District Court
concluded that counsel did a constitutionally adequate job
and that “[t]here simply is not a reasonable probability
that, absent counsel’s alleged errors, the jury would have
concluded that the balance of aggravating and mitigating
circumstances did not warrant death.” Spisak v. Coyle,
App. to Pet. for Cert. 204a. The Court of Appeals, how
ever, reached a contrary conclusion. It held that counsel’s
closing argument, measured by “ ‘an objective standard of
reasonableness,’ ” was inadequate, and it asserted that “a
reasonable probability exists ” that adequate representa
tion would have led to a different result. 465 F. 3d, at 703,
706 (quoting Strickland, supra, at 688). Responding to the
State’s petition for certiorari, we agreed to review the
Court of Appeals’ terse finding of a “reasonable probabil
ity” that a more adequate argument would have changed a
juror’s vote.
In his closing argument at the penalty phase, Spisak’s
counsel described Spisak’s killings in some detail. He
acknowledged that Spisak’s admiration for Hitler inspired
his crimes. He portrayed Spisak as “sick,” “twisted,” and
“demented.” 8 Tr. 2896 (July 19, 1983). And he said that
Spisak was “never going to be any different.” Ibid. He
then pointed out that all the experts had testified that
Spisak suffered from some degree of mental illness. And,
after a fairly lengthy and rambling disquisition about his
own decisions about calling expert witnesses and prepar
ing them, counsel argued that, even if Spisak was not
legally insane so as to warrant a verdict of not guilty by
reason of insanity, he nonetheless was sufficiently men
tally ill to lessen his culpability to the point where he
should not be executed. Counsel also told the jury that,
when weighing Spisak’s mental illness against the “sub
stantial” aggravating factors present in the case, id., at

