(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINI-

STRATION ET AL. v. NELSON ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–530.

Argued October 5, 2010—Decided January 19, 2011

The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) has a
workforce of both federal civil servants and Government contract em
ployees. Respondents are contract employees at NASA’s Jet Propul
sion Laboratory (JPL), which is operated by the California Institute
of Technology (Cal Tech). Respondents were not subject to Govern
ment background checks at the time they were hired, but that
changed when the President ordered the adoption of uniform identifi
cation standards for both federal civil servants and contractor em
ployees. The Department of Commerce mandated that contract em
ployees with long-term access to federal facilities complete a standard
background check, typically the National Agency Check with Inquir
ies (NACI), by October 2007. NASA modified its contract with Cal
Tech to reflect the new requirement, and JPL announced that em
ployees who did not complete the NACI process in time would be de
nied access to JPL and face termination by Cal Tech.
The NACI process, long used for prospective civil servants, begins
with the employee filling out a standard form (here, Standard Form
85, the Questionnaire for Non-Sensitive Positions (SF–85)). SF–85
asks whether an employee has “used, possessed, supplied, or manu
factured illegal drugs” in the last year. If so, the employee must pro
vide details, including information about “treatment or counseling re
ceived.” The employee must also sign a release authorizing the
Government to obtain personal information from schools, employers,
and others during its investigation. Once SF–85 is completed, the
Government sends the employee’s references a questionnaire (Form
42) that asks open-ended questions about whether they have “any
reason to question” the employee’s “honesty or trustworthiness,” or


2

NASA v. NELSON
Syllabus
have “adverse information” concerning a variety of other matters. All
SF–85 and Form 42 responses are subject to the protections of the
Privacy Act.
With the deadline for completing the NACI process drawing near,
respondents brought suit, claiming, as relevant here, that the back
ground-check process violates a constitutional right to informational
privacy. The District Court declined to issue a preliminary injunc
tion, but the Ninth Circuit reversed. It held that SF–85’s inquiries
into recent drug involvement furthered the Government’s interest in
combating illegal-drug use, but that the drug “treatment or counsel
ing” question furthered no legitimate interest and was thus likely to
be held unconstitutional. It also held that Form 42’s open-ended
questions were not narrowly tailored to meet the Government’s inter
ests in verifying contractors’ identities and ensuring JPL’s security,
and thus also likely violated respondents’ informational-privacy
rights.

Held:
1. In two cases decided over 30 years ago, this Court referred
broadly to a constitutional privacy “interest in avoiding disclosure of
personal matters.” Whalen v. Roe, 429 U. S. 589, 599–600; Nixon v.
Administrator of General Services, 433 U. S. 425, 457. In Whalen, the
Court upheld a New York law permitting the collection of names and
addresses of persons prescribed dangerous drugs, finding that the
statute’s “security provisions,” which protected against “public disclo
sure” of patient information, 462 U. S., at 600–601, were sufficient to
protect a privacy interest “arguably . . . root[ed] in the Constitution,”
id., at 605. In Nixon, the Court upheld a law requiring the former
President to turn over his presidential papers and tape recordings for
archival review and screening, concluding that the federal Act at is
sue, like the statute in Whalen, had protections against “undue dis
semination of private materials.” 433 U. S, at 458. Since Nixon, the
Court has said little else on the subject of a constitutional right to in
formational privacy. Pp. 8–10.
2. Assuming, without deciding, that the Government’s challenged
inquiries implicate a privacy interest of constitutional significance,
that interest, whatever its scope, does not prevent the Government
from asking reasonable questions of the sort included on SF–85 and
Form 42 in an employment background investigation that is subject
to the Privacy Act’s safeguards against public disclosure. Pp. 10–24.
(a) The forms are reasonable in light of the Government interests
at stake. Pp. 11–19.
(1) Judicial review of the forms must take into account the con
text in which the Government’s challenged inquiries arise. When the
Government acts in its capacity “as proprietor” and manager of its


Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
“internal operation,” Cafeteria & Restaurant Workers v. McElroy, 367
U. S. 886, 896, it has a much freer hand than when it regulates as to
citizens generally. The questions respondents challenge are part of a
standard background check of the sort used by millions of private
employers. The Government has been conducting employment inves
tigations since the Republic’s earliest days, and the President has
had statutory authority to assess an applicant’s fitness for the civil
service since 1871. Standard background investigations similar to
those at issue became mandatory for federal civil-service candidates
in 1953, and the investigations challenged here arose from a decision
to extend that requirement to federal contract employees. This his
tory shows that the Government has an interest in conducting basic
background checks in order to ensure the security of its facilities and
to employ a competent, reliable workforce to carry out the people’s
business. The interest is not diminished by the fact that respondents
are contract employees. There are no meaningful distinctions in the
duties of NASA’s civil-service and contractor employees, especially at
JPL, where contract employees do work that is critical to NASA’s
mission and that is funded with a multibillion dollar taxpayer in
vestment. Pp. 12–15.
(2) The challenged questions on SF–85 and Form 42 are rea
sonable, employment-related inquiries that further the Government’s
interests in managing its internal operations. SF–85’s “treatment or
counseling” question is a followup question to a reasonable inquiry
about illegal-drug use. In context, the drug-treatment inquiry is also
a reasonable, employment-related inquiry. The Government, recog
nizing that illegal-drug use is both a criminal and medical issue,
seeks to separate out those drug users who are taking steps to ad
dress and overcome their problems. Thus, it uses responses to the
drug-treatment question as a mitigating factor in its contractor cre
dentialing decisions. The Court rejects the argument that the Gov
ernment has a constitutional burden to demonstrate that its em
ployment background questions are “necessary” or the least
restrictive means of furthering its interests. So exacting a standard
runs directly contrary to Whalen. See 429 U. S., at 596–597. Pp. 16–
18.
(3) Like SF–85’s drug-treatment question, Form 42’s open
ended questions are reasonably aimed at identifying capable employ
ees who will faithfully conduct the Government’s business. Asking
an applicant’s designated references broad questions about job suit
ability is an appropriate tool for separating strong candidates from
weak ones. The reasonableness of such questions is illustrated by
their pervasiveness in the public and private sectors. Pp. 18–19.
(b) In addition to being reasonable in light of the Government in


4

NASA v. NELSON
Syllabus
terests at stake, SF–85 and Form 42 are also subject to substantial
protections against disclosure to the public. Whalen and Nixon rec
ognized that a “statutory or regulatory duty to avoid unwarranted
disclosures” generally allays privacy concerns created by government
“accumulation” of “personal information” for “public purposes.”
Whalen, supra, at 605. Respondents attack only the Government’s
collection of information, and here, as in Whalen and Nixon, the in
formation collected is shielded by statute from unwarranted disclo
sure. The Privacy Act—which allows the Government to maintain
only those records “relevant and necessary to accomplish” a purpose
authorized by law, 5 U. S. C. §552a(e)(1); requires written consent be
fore the Government may disclose an individual’s records, §552a(b);
and imposes criminal liability for willful violations of its nondisclo
sure obligations, §552a(i)(1)—“evidence[s] a proper concern” for indi
vidual privacy. Whalen, supra, at 605; Nixon, supra, at 458–459.
Respondents’ claim that the statutory exceptions to the Privacy Act’s
disclosure bar, see §§552a(b)(1)–(12), leave its protections too porous
to supply a meaningful check against unwarranted disclosures. But
that argument rests on an incorrect reading of Whalen, Nixon, and
the Privacy Act. Pp. 19–23.

530 F. 3d 865, reversed and remanded.
ALITO, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS, C. J.,
and KENNEDY, GINSBURG, BREYER, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined. SCALIA,
J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment, in which THOMAS, J.,
joined. THOMAS, J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment. KAGAN, J., took no part in the consideration or decision of the case.

