Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of the Court

request, respondents submitted affidavits asserting that
these rates were within the range of prevailing market
rates for legal services in the relevant market.
The other half of the amount that respondents sought
represented a fee enhancement for superior work and
results. Affidavits submitted in support of this request
claimed that the lodestar amount “would be generally
insufficient to induce lawyers of comparable skill, judg
ment, professional representation and experience” to
litigate this case. See, e.g., App. 80. Petitioners objected
to the fee request, contending that some of the proposed
hourly rates were too high, that the hours claimed were
excessive, and that the enhancement would duplicate
factors that were reflected in the lodestar amount.
The District Court awarded fees of approximately
$10.5 million. See 454 F. Supp. 2d 1260, 1296 (ND Ga.
2006). The District Court found that the hourly rates
proposed by respondents were “fair and reasonable,” id., at
1285, but that some of the entries on counsel’s billing
records were vague and that the hours claimed for many of
the billing categories were excessive. The court therefore
cut the non-travel hours by 15% and halved the hourly
rate for travel hours. This resulted in a lodestar calcula
tion of approximately $6 million.
The court then enhanced this award by 75%, concluding
that the lodestar calculation did not take into account “(1)
the fact that class counsel were required to advance case
expenses of $1.7 million over a three-year period with no
on[-]going reimbursement, (2) the fact that class counsel
were not paid on an on-going basis as the work was being
performed, and (3) the fact that class counsel’s ability to
recover a fee and expense reimbursement were completely
contingent on the outcome of the case.” Id., at 1288. The
court stated that respondents’ attorneys had exhibited “a
higher degree of skill, commitment, dedication, and pro
fessionalism . . . than the Court has seen displayed by the

