Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
or perhaps only a few similar factors. In such a case, the trial judge
should adjust the hourly rate in accordance with specific proof linking
the attorney’s ability to a prevailing market rate. Second, an en
hancement may be appropriate if the attorney’s performance includes
an extraordinary outlay of expenses and the litigation is exception
ally protracted. In such cases, the enhancement amount must be cal
culated using a method that is reasonable, objective, and capable of
being reviewed on appeal, such as by applying a standard interest
rate to the qualifying expense outlays. Third, an enhancement may
be appropriate where an attorney’s performance involves exceptional
delay in the payment of fees. In such a case, the enhancement should
be calculated by a method similar to that used for an exceptional de
lay in expense reimbursement. Enhancements are not appropriate
on the ground that departures from hourly billing are becoming more
common. Nor can they be based on a flawed analogy to the increas
ingly popular practice of paying attorneys a reduced hourly rate with
a bonus for obtaining specified results. Pp. 9–12.
2. The District Court did not provide proper justification for the
75% fee enhancement it awarded in this case. It commented that the
enhancement was necessary to compensate counsel at the appropri
ate hourly rate, but the effect was to raise the top rate from $495 to
more than $866 per hour, while nothing in the record shows that this
is an appropriate figure for the relevant market. The court also em
phasized that counsel had to make extraordinary outlays for ex
penses and wait for reimbursement, but did not calculate the amount
of the enhancement attributable to this factor. Similarly, the court
noted that counsel did not receive fees on an ongoing basis during the
case, but did not sufficiently link this to proof that the delay was out
side the normal range expected by attorneys who rely on §1988 for
fees. Nor did the court calculate the cost to counsel of any extraordi
nary and unwarranted delay. And its reliance on the contingency of
the outcome contravenes Dague, supra, at 565. Finally, insofar as
the court relied on a comparison of counsel’s performance in this case
with that of counsel in unnamed prior cases, it did not employ a
methodology that permitted meaningful appellate review. While de
termining a “reasonable attorney’s fee” is within the trial judge’s
sound discretion under §1988, that discretion is not unlimited. The
judge must provide a reasonably specific explanation for all aspects of
a fee determination, including any enhancement. Pp. 12–15.
532 F. 3d 1209, reversed and remanded.
ALITO, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS, C. J.,
and SCALIA, KENNEDY, and THOMAS, JJ., joined. KENNEDY, J., and THOMAS, J., filed concurring opinions. BREYER, J., filed an opinion concur
ring in part and dissenting in part, in which STEVENS, GINSBURG, and
SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined.

