10

PERDUE v. KENNY A.
Opinion of BREYER, J.

ment, the lodestar calculation in this case translates to an
average hourly fee per attorney of $249. See id., at 1287
(lodestar calculation and attorney hours). (The majority’s
reference to an hourly fee of $866, ante, at 12, refers to the
rate associated with the single highest paid of the 17
attorneys under the enhanced fee, not the average hourly
rate under the lodestar. The lay reader should also bear
in mind that a lawyer’s “fee” is substantially greater than
his “profit,” given that attorneys must sometimes cover
case-specific costs (which in this case exceeded $800,000,
see 454 F. Supp. 2d, at 1291) and also must cover routine
overhead expenses, which typically consume 40% of their
fees, see Altman Weil Publications, Inc., Survey of Law
Firm Economics 30 (2007 ed.)).
At $249 per hour, the lodestar would compensate this
group of attorneys—whom the District Court described as
extraordinary—at a rate lower than the average rate
charged by attorneys practicing law in the State of Geor
gia, where the average hourly rate is $268. See id., at 89.
Accordingly, even the majority would seem to acknowledge
that some form of an enhancement is appropriate in this
case. See ante, at 10 (“[A]n enhancement may be appro
priate where the method used in determining the hourly
rate employed in the lodestar calculation does not ade
quately measure the attorney’s true market value, as
demonstrated in part during the litigation”). Indeed, the
fact that these exceptional results were achieved in a case
where “much of the work,” ante, at 13, n. 7, was performed
by relatively inexperienced attorneys (who, accordingly,
would be compensated by the lodestar “below the market
average,” ibid.) is all the more reason to think that their
service rendered their outstanding performance worthy of
an enhancement. By comparison, the District Court’s
enhanced award—a special one-time adjustment unique to
this exceptional case—would compensate these attorneys,
on this one occasion, at an average hourly rate of $435,

