(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

PERDUE, GOVERNOR OF GEORGIA, ET AL. v. KENNY
A., BY HIS NEXT FRIEND WINN, ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE ELEVENTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–970.

Argued October 14, 2009—Decided April 21, 2010

Title 42 U. S. C. §1988 authorizes courts to award a “reasonable” attor
ney’s fee for prevailing parties in civil rights actions. Half of respon
dents’ $14 million fee request was based on their calculation of the
“lodestar,” i.e., the number of hours the attorneys and their employ
ees worked multiplied by the hourly rates prevailing in the commu
nity. The other half represented a fee enhancement for superior work
and results, supported by affidavits claiming that the lodestar would
be insufficient to induce lawyers of comparable skill and experience
to litigate this case. Awarding fees of about $10.5 million, the Dis
trict Court found that the proposed hourly rates were “fair and rea
sonable,” but that some of the entries on counsel’s billing records
were vague and that the hours claimed for many categories were ex
cessive. The court therefore cut the lodestar to approximately $6 mil
lion, but enhanced that award by 75%, or an additional $4.5 million.
The Eleventh Circuit affirmed in reliance on its precedent.
Held:
1. The calculation of an attorney’s fee based on the lodestar may be
increased due to superior performance, but only in extraordinary cir
cumstances. Pp. 5–12.
(a) The lodestar approach has “achieved dominance in the federal
courts.” Gisbrecht v. Barnhart, 535 U. S. 789, 801. Although imper
fect, it has several important virtues: It produces an award that ap
proximates the fee the prevailing attorney would have received for
representing a paying client who was billed by the hour in a compa
rable case; and it is readily administrable, see, e.g., Burlington v. Da
gue, 505 U. S. 557, 566, and “objective,” Hensley v. Eckerhart, 461
U. S. 424, 433, thereby cabining trial judges’ discretion, permitting

