12

PERDUE v. KENNY A.
Opinion of BREYER, J.

are “virtually” barred in all cases. Ante, at 2 (concurring
opinion). Our prior cases make clear that enhancements
are permitted in “ ‘exceptional’ cases,” Delaware Valley,
478 U. S., at 565, where the attorney achieves “exceptional
success,” Hensley, 461 U. S., at 435; see also Blum, 465
U. S., at 896–901. By definition, such exceptional circum
stances occur only rarely. See ante, p. ___ (KENNEDY, J.,
concurring). I do not see how the Court could “advance”
our fee enhancement jurisprudence so as to further dis
courage lodestar enhancements without overruling the
precedents I have just cited, which the Court has not done.
To the contrary, today the Court “reaffirm[s]” those prece
dents, which allow enhancements for exceptional perform
ance. Ante, at 1. And with respect to that central holding
we are unanimous.
Nor is my disagreement with the Court absolute with
respect to the proper resolution of the case before us, for
the Court does not purport to prohibit the District Court
from awarding an enhanced fee on remand if that court
provides more detailed reasoning supporting its decision.
Ante, at 12; cf. Tr. of Oral Arg. 47. But the majority and I
do disagree in this respect: I would not disturb the judg
ment below. “A request for attorney’s fees should not
result in a second major litigation.” Hensley, 461 U. S., at
437. Nor should it lead to years of protracted appellate
review. See id., at 455–456 (Brennan, J., concurring in
part and dissenting in part). We did not grant certiorari
in this case to consider the fact-intensive dispute over
whether this is, in fact, an exceptional case that merits a
lodestar enhancement. The District Court has already
resolved that question and the Court of Appeals affirmed
its judgment, having found no abuse of discretion. I would
have been content to resolve no more than the question
presented. But, even were I to follow the Court’s inclina
tion to say more, I would hold that the principles upon
which we agree—including the applicability of abuse-of

