Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of the Court

was the “minimum enhancement of the lodestar necessary
to reasonably compensate [respondents’] counsel.” 454
F. Supp. 2d, at 1290. But the effect of the enhancement
was to increase the top rate for the attorneys to more than
$866 per hour,7 and the District Court did not point to
anything in the record that shows that this is an appro
priate figure for the relevant market.
The District Court pointed to the fact that respondents’
counsel had to make extraordinary outlays for expenses
and had to wait for reimbursement, id., at 1288, but the
court did not calculate the amount of the enhancement
that is attributable to this factor. Similarly, the District
Court noted that respondents’ counsel did not receive fees
on an ongoing basis while the case was pending, but the
court did not sufficiently link this factor to proof in the
record that the delay here was outside the normal range
expected by attorneys who rely on §1988 for the payment
of their fees or quantify the disparity. Nor did the court
provide a calculation of the cost to counsel of any extraor
dinary and unwarranted delay. And the court’s reliance
on the contingency of the outcome contravenes our holding
in Dague. See 505 U. S., at 565.
Finally, insofar as the District Court relied on a com
parison of the performance of counsel in this case with the
performance of counsel in unnamed prior cases, the Dis
trict Court did not employ a methodology that permitted
——————
7 JUSTICE

BREYER’s reliance on the average hourly rate for all of re
spondents’ attorneys is highly misleading. See post, at 10. In calculat
ing the lodestar, the District Court found that the hourly rate for each
of these attorneys was “eminently fair and reasonable” and “consistent
with the prevailing market rates in Atlanta for comparable work.” 454
F. Supp. 2d, at 1285–1286. JUSTICE BREYER’s calculation of an average
hourly rate for all attorney hours reflects nothing more than the fact
that much of the work was performed by attorneys whose “fair and
reasonable” market rate was below the market average. There is
nothing unfair about compensating these attorneys at the very rate that
they requested.

