Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of BREYER, J.

case, witnessed the proceedings, and been able to evaluate
the attorneys’ overall performance in light of the objec
tives, context, legal difficulty, and practical obstacles
present in the case. In a word, the district judge will have
observed the attorney’s true “value, as demonstrated . . .
during the litigation.” Ibid. (emphasis added). By con
trast, a court of appeals, faced with a cold and perhaps
lengthy record, will inevitably have less time and oppor
tunity to determine whether the lawyers have done an
exceptionally fine job. And this Court is yet less suited to
performing that inquiry.
Accordingly, determining
whether a fee enhancement is warranted in a given case
“is a matter that is committed to the sound discretion of a
trial judge,” ante, at 13, and the function of appellate
courts is to review that judge’s determination for an abuse
of such discretion. See Pierce v. Underwood, 487 U. S.
552, 571 (1988); see also General Elec. Co. v. Joiner, 522
U. S. 136, 143 (1997) (“[D]eference . . . is the hallmark of
abuse-of-discretion review”).
This case well illustrates why our tiered and function
ally specialized judicial system places the task of deter
mining an attorney’s fee award primarily in the district
court’s hands. The plaintiffs’ lawyers spent eight years
investigating the underlying facts, developing the initial
complaint, conducting court proceedings, and working out
final relief. The District Court’s docket, with over 600
entries, consists of more than 18,000 pages. Transcripts of
hearings and depositions, along with other documents,
have produced a record that fills 20 large boxes. Neither
we, nor an appellate panel, can easily read that entire
record. Nor should we attempt to second-guess a district
judge who is aware of the many intangible matters that
the written page cannot reflect.
My own review of this expansive record cannot possibly
be exhaustive. But those portions of the record I have
reviewed lead me to conclude, like the Court of Appeals,

