14

PERDUE v. KENNY A.
Opinion of the Court

meaningful appellate review. Needless to say, we do not
question the sincerity of the District Court’s observations,
and we are in no position to assess their accuracy. But
when a trial judge awards an enhancement on an impres
sionistic basis, a major purpose of the lodestar method—
providing an objective and reviewable basis for fees, see
id., at 566—is undermined.
Determining a “reasonable attorney’s fee” is a matter
that is committed to the sound discretion of a trial judge,
see 42 U. S. C. §1988 (permitting court, “in its discretion,”
to award fees), but the judge’s discretion is not unlimited.
It is essential that the judge provide a reasonably specific
explanation for all aspects of a fee determination, includ
ing any award of an enhancement. Unless such an expla
nation is given, adequate appellate review is not feasible,
and without such review, widely disparate awards may be
made, and awards may be influenced (or at least, may
appear to be influenced) by a judge’s subjective opinion
regarding particular attorneys or the importance of the
case. In addition, in future cases, defendants contemplat
ing the possibility of settlement will have no way to esti
mate the likelihood of having to pay a potentially huge
enhancement. See Marek v. Chesny, 473 U. S. 1, 7 (1985)
(“ ‘[M]any a defendant would be unwilling to make a bind
ing settlement offer on terms that left it exposed to liabil
ity for attorney’s fees in whatever amount the court might
fix on motion of the plaintiff ’ ”).
Section 1988 serves an important public purpose by
making it possible for persons without means to bring suit
to vindicate their rights. But unjustified enhancements
that serve only to enrich attorneys are not consistent with
the statute’s aim.8 In many cases, attorney’s fees awarded
——————
8 JUSTICE BREYER’s opinion dramatically illustrates the danger of
allowing a trial judge to award a huge enhancement not supported by
any discernible methodology. That approach would retain the $4.5

