4

PERDUE v. KENNY A.
Opinion of the Court

attorneys in any other case during its 27 years on the
bench.” Id., at 1289. The court also commented that the
results obtained were “ ‘extraordinary’ ” and added that
“[a]fter 58 years as a practicing attorney and federal
judge, the Court is unaware of any other case in which a
plaintiff class has achieved such a favorable result on such
a comprehensive scale.” Id., at 1290. The enhancement
resulted in an additional $4.5 million fee award.
Relying on prior Circuit precedent, a panel of the Elev
enth Circuit affirmed. 532 F. 3d 1209 (2008). The panel
held that the District Court had not abused its discretion
by failing to make a larger reduction in the number of
hours for which respondents’ attorneys sought reim
bursement, but the panel commented that it “would have
cut the billable hours more if we were deciding the matter
in the first instance” and added that the hourly rates
approved by the District Court also “appear[ed] to be on
the generous side.” Id., at 1220, and n. 2. On the question
of the enhancement, however, the panel splintered, with
each judge writing a separate opinion.
Judge Carnes concluded that binding Eleventh Circuit
precedent required that the decision of the District Court
be affirmed, but he opined that the reasoning in our opin
ions suggested that no enhancement should be allowed in
this case. He concluded that the quality of the attorneys’
performance was “adequately accounted for ‘either in
determining the reasonable number of hours expended on
the litigation or in setting the reasonable hourly rates.’ ”
Id., at 1225 (quoting Pennsylvania v. Delaware Valley
Citizens’ Council for Clean Air, 478 U. S. 546, 565–566
(1986) (Delaware Valley I)). He found that an enhance
ment could not be justified based on delay in the recovery
of attorney’s fees and reimbursable expenses because such
delay is a routine feature of cases brought under 42
U. S. C. §1983. And he reasoned that the District Court
had contravened our holding in Burlington v. Dague, 505

