2

PERDUE v. KENNY A.
Syllabus
meaningful judicial review, and producing reasonably predictable re
sults. Pp. 5–7.
(b) This Court has established six important rules that lead to
today’s decision. First, a “reasonable” fee is one that is sufficient to
induce a capable attorney to undertake the representation of a meri
torious civil rights case, see Pennsylvania v. Delaware Valley Citi
zens’ Council for Clean Air, 478 U. S. 546, 565, but that does not pro
vide “a form of economic relief to improve the financial lot of
attorneys,” ibid. Second, there is a “strong” presumption that the
lodestar method yields a sufficient fee. See, e.g., id., at 564. Third,
the Court has never sustained an enhancement of a lodestar amount
for performance, but has repeatedly said that an enhancement may
be awarded in “rare” and “exceptional” circumstances. E.g., id., at
565. Fourth, “the lodestar includes most, if not all, of the relevant
factors constituting a ‘reasonable’ attorney’s fee.” Id., at 566. An en
hancement may not be based on a factor that is subsumed in the
lodestar calculation, such as the case’s novelty and complexity, see,
e.g., Blum v. Stenson, 465 U. S. 886, 898, or the quality of an attor
ney’s performance, Delaware Valley, supra, at 566. Fifth, the burden
of proving that an enhancement is necessary must be borne by the fee
applicant. E.g., Blum, 465 U. S., at 901. Sixth, an applicant seeking
an enhancement must produce “specific evidence” supporting the
award, id., at 899, 901, to assure that the calculation is objective and
capable of being reviewed on appeal. Pp. 7–9.
(c) The Court rejects any contention that a fee determined by the
lodestar method may not be enhanced in any situation. The “strong
presumption” that the lodestar is reasonable may be overcome in
those rare circumstances in which the lodestar does not adequately
account for a factor that may properly be considered in determining a
reasonable fee. P. 9.
(d) The Court treats the quality of an attorney’s performance and
the results obtained as one factor, since superior results are relevant
only to the extent it can be shown that they stem from superior at
torney performance and not another factor, such as inferior perform
ance by opposing counsel. The circumstances in which superior at
torney performance is not adequately taken into account in the
lodestar calculation are “rare” and “exceptional.” Enhancements
should not be awarded without specific evidence that the lodestar fee
would not have been “adequate to attract competent counsel.” Blum,
supra, at 897. First, an enhancement may be appropriate where the
method used to determine the hourly rate does not adequately meas
ure the attorney’s true market value, as demonstrated in part during
the litigation. This may occur if the hourly rate formula takes into
account only a single factor (such as years since admission to the bar)

