10

PERDUE v. KENNY A.
Opinion of the Court

sider whether superior attorney performance can justify
an enhancement. And in light of the principles derived
from our prior cases, we inquire whether there are circum
stances in which superior attorney performance is not
adequately taken into account in the lodestar calculation.
We conclude that there are a few such circumstances but
that these circumstances are indeed “rare” and “excep
tional,” and require specific evidence that the lodestar
fee would not have been “adequate to attract competent
counsel,” Blum, supra, at 897 (internal quotation marks
omitted).
First, an enhancement may be appropriate where the
method used in determining the hourly rate employed in
the lodestar calculation does not adequately measure the
attorney’s true market value, as demonstrated in part
during the litigation.5 This may occur if the hourly rate is
determined by a formula that takes into account only a
single factor (such as years since admission to the bar)6 or
perhaps only a few similar factors. In such a case, an
enhancement may be appropriate so that an attorney is
compensated at the rate that the attorney would receive in
cases not governed by the federal fee-shifting statutes.
But in order to provide a calculation that is objective and
reviewable, the trial judge should adjust the attorney’s
hourly rate in accordance with specific proof linking the
attorney’s ability to a prevailing market rate.
Second, an enhancement may be appropriate if the
——————
5 Respondents correctly note that an attorney’s “brilliant insights and
critical maneuvers sometimes matter far more than hours worked or
years of experience.” Brief for Respondents 14. But as we said in Blum
v. Stenson, 465 U. S. 886, 898 (1984), “[i]n those cases, the special skill
and experience of counsel should be reflected in the reasonableness of
the hourly rates.”
6 See, e.g., Salazar v. District of Columbia, 123 F. Supp. 2d 8 (DC
2000); Laffey v. Northwest Airlines, Inc., 572 F. Supp. 354 (DC 1983),
aff’d in part, rev’d in part, 746 F. 2d 4 (CADC 1984).

