Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

interest in the water itself unique. And it is the respective
interests of the States in the water itself that are being
litigated in this original action—not the claims of particu
lar citizens that they be allowed to put the water to speci
fied uses. The latter subject is “an intramural dispute
over the distribution of water within the [State],” ibid.,
and is not the subject of this original proceeding.
The majority recognizes as much with respect to Char
lotte, ante, at 16–18, but departs from these principles in
granting intervention to Duke Energy and CRWSP. The
majority’s reasons for doing so do not withstand scrutiny.
The majority initially contends that Duke Energy
should be allowed to intervene because it possesses “rele
vant information” that we are “likely to consider.” Ante, at
14, 16. Nonparties often do, but that is not a “compelling
interest” justifying intervention. I have little doubt that
Philadelphia possessed pertinent information in New
Jersey v. New York, but we did not permit Philadelphia to
intervene on that ground. Parties to litigation have ready
means of access to relevant information held by nonpar
ties, and those nonparties can certainly furnish such
information on their own if they consider it in their best
interests (through, for example, participation as amici
curiae).
The majority also states that Duke Energy has compel
ling interests in its hydroelectric operations along the
river, and in “the amount of water that Duke Energy
needs to sustain its operations and provide electricity to
the region.” Ante, at 15. These are simply interests in a
particular use of water or its flow. Even if Duke Energy
uses water for particularly important purposes, its inter
ests are no different in kind from the interests of any other
entity that relies on water for its commercial operations.
Finally, the majority asserts that Duke Energy “has a
unique and compelling interest in protecting the terms of
its existing [Federal Energy Regulatory Commission

