Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

sents all its citizens in an equitable apportionment action,
these citizens have no claim themselves against the other
State. They are instead “bound by the result reached
through representation by their respective States,” regard
less of whether those citizens are parties to the suit.
Nebraska v. Wyoming, 515 U. S. 1, 22 (1995).
This basic principle applies without regard to whether
the State agrees with and will advance the particular
interest asserted by a specific private entity. The State
“ ‘must be deemed to represent all its citizens,’ ” New Jer
sey v. New York, supra, at 372 (quoting Kentucky v. Indi
ana, supra, at 173–174; emphasis added), not just those
who subscribe to the State’s position before this Court.
The directive that a State cannot be “judicially impeached
on matters of policy by its own subjects,” New Jersey v.
New York, supra, at 373, obviously applies to the case in
which a subject disagrees with the position of the State.
A State’s citizens also need not be made parties to an
equitable apportionment action because the Court’s judg
ment in such an action does not determine the water
rights of any individual citizen. We made that clear long
ago in two decisions arising from the same dispute, Wyo
ming v. Colorado, 298 U. S. 573 (1936), and Wyoming v.
Colorado, 309 U. S. 572 (1940). In those cases, Wyoming
sought to enforce this Court’s earlier decree apportioning
the Laramie River. See Wyoming v. Colorado, 260 U. S. 1
(1922). We held that the decree controlled the allocation
of water between Wyoming and Colorado, not within
them. As we recognized, our decision apportioning the
river did not “withdraw water claims dealt with therein
from the operation of local laws relating to their transfer
or . . . restrict their utilization in ways not affecting the
rights of one State and her claimants as against the other
State and her claimants.” 298 U. S., at 584. Thus, al
though the decree referred to particular uses of water in
Colorado, we held that those individual uses could vary

