Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

with the Court that Charlotte should not be allowed to
intervene.
A bistate entity cannot be allowed to intervene merely
because it embodies an “intermingling of state interests.”
Ante, at 13, n. 6. The same would be true of any bistate
entity, or indeed any corporation or individual conducting
business in both States. An exception for such cases
would certainly swallow the New Jersey v. New York rule.
Entities with interests in both States must seek to vindi
cate those interests within each State. Bistate entities are
not States entitled to invoke our original jurisdiction, and
should not be effectively accorded an automatic right to
intervene as parties in cases within that jurisdiction.
With respect to both Duke Energy and CRWSP, the
majority further relies on its conclusion that the States
will not “properly represent” the interests of those entities.
Ante, at 13; see ante, at 16. If by that the Court means
that the States may adopt positions adverse to Duke
Energy and CRWSP, that surely cannot be enough. The
guiding principle articulated in New Jersey v. New York is
“that the state, when a party to a suit involving a matter
of sovereign interest, ‘must be deemed to represent all its
citizens,’ ” and may not be “judicially impeached on mat
ters of policy by its own subjects.” 345 U. S., at 372–373
(quoting Kentucky v. Indiana, 281 U. S., at 173–174). This
case involves a “matter of sovereign interest”—the equita
ble apportionment of water—and the States therefore
“properly represen[t]” the shared interests in water of “all”
their citizens, including Duke Energy and CRWSP. 345
U. S., at 372–373. An interest is “not properly repre
sented” by a State, id., at 373, when it is not a sovereign
interest but instead a parochial one, such as the interests
held to justify intervention in the cases on which the
majority relies. See supra, at 7–8.
The majority also pays little heed to the practical con
straints on this Court’s original jurisdiction. It is hard to

