Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

original docket. But the responsibility for the exercise of
this Court’s original jurisdiction remains ours alone under
the Constitution.
These two considerations—that our original jurisdiction
is limited to high claims affecting state sovereignty, and
that practical realities limit our ability to act as a trial
court—converge in our standard for intervention in origi
nal actions. We articulated that standard in New Jersey v.
New York, 345 U. S. 369, 373 (1953) (per curiam). There,
we denied the city of Philadelphia’s motion for leave to
intervene in an action, to which the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania was already a party, involving the appor
tionment of the Delaware River. Id., at 373–374. We set
out the following test for intervention in an original action:
“An intervenor whose state is already a party should have
the burden of showing some compelling interest in his own
right, apart from his interest in a class with all other
citizens and creatures of the state, which interest is not
properly represented by the state.” Id., at 373.
This exacting standard is grounded on a “necessary
recognition of sovereign dignity,” id., at 373, under which
“the state, when a party to a suit involving a matter of
sovereign interest, ‘must be deemed to represent all its
citizens,’ ” id., at 372 (quoting Kentucky v. Indiana, 281
U. S. 163, 173–174 (1930)). In applying that doctrine to
motions to intervene, the New Jersey v. New York test
precludes a State from being “judicially impeached on
matters of policy by its own subjects,” and prevents the
use of the Court’s original jurisdiction to air “intramural
dispute[s]” that should be settled in a different forum—
namely, within the States. 345 U. S., at 373.
The New Jersey v. New York test is also “a working rule
for good judicial administration.” Ibid. Without it, “there
would be no practical limitation on the number of citizens,
as such, who would be entitled to be made parties.” Ibid.
Indeed, the Court observed that allowing Philadelphia to

