12

SOUTH CAROLINA v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

see how the arguments the Court accepts today could not
also be pressed by countless other water users in either
North or South Carolina. Under the Court’s analysis, I
see “no practical limitation on the number of citizens, as
such, who would be entitled to be made parties.” New
Jersey v. New York, supra, at 373. To the extent interven
tion is allowed for some private entities with interests in
the water, others who also have an interest will feel com
pelled to intervene as well—and we will be hard put to
refuse them. See Utah v. United States, 394 U. S., at 95–
96 (denying intervention to a corporation that sought to
quiet its title to land because, “[i]f [it were] admitted,
fairness would require the admission of any of the other
120 private landowners who wish to quiet their title . . . ,
greatly increasing the complexity of this litigation”). An
equitable apportionment action will take on the character
istics of an interpleader case, with all those asserting
interests in the limited supply of water jostling for their
share like animals at a water hole. And we will find our
selves in a “quandary whereby we must opt either to pick
and choose arbitrarily among similarly situated litigants
or to devote truly enormous portions of our energies to
[original] matters.” Ohio v. Wyandotte Chemicals Corp.,
401 U. S., at 504.
Allowing nonsovereign entities to intervene as parties
will inevitably prolong the resolution of this and other
equitable apportionment actions, which already take
considerable time. Intervenors do not come alone—they
bring along more issues to decide, more discovery re
quests, more exceptions to the recommendations of the
Special Master. In particular, intervention makes settling
a case more difficult, as a private intervenor has the right
to object to a settlement agreement between the States, if
not the power to block a settlement altogether. Cf. Fire
fighters v. Cleveland, 478 U. S. 501, 529 (1986).
And all this for what? The Special Master, and through

