(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

SOUTH CAROLINA v. NORTH CAROLINA
ON EXCEPTIONS TO THE REPORT OF THE SPECIAL MASTER
No. 138, Orig. Argued October 13, 2009—Decided January 20, 2010
South Carolina brought this original action seeking an equitable appor
tionment with North Carolina of the Catawba River’s (river) waters.
The Court referred the matter to a Special Master, together with the
motions of three nonstate entities—the Catawba River Water Supply
Project (CRWSP), Duke Energy Carolinas, LLC (Duke Energy), and
the city of Charlotte, N. C.—seeking leave to intervene as parties.
South Carolina opposed the motions. After a hearing, the Special
Master granted all three motions and, on South Carolina’s request,
memorialized her reasoning in a First Interim Report. Among other
things, she recognized that New Jersey v. New York, 345 U. S. 369,
373, sets forth the “appropriate” standard for a nonstate entity’s in
tervention in an original action; looked beyond intervention to origi
nal actions in which the Court allowed complaining States to name
nonstate entities as defendants in order to give that standard con
text; “distilled” from the cases a broad rule governing intervention;
and applied that rule to each of the proposed intervenors. South
Carolina presented exceptions.
Held: The CRWSP and Duke Energy have satisfied the appropriate
intervention standard, but Charlotte has not. Pp. 6–18.
(a) Under New Jersey v. New York, “[a]n intervenor whose state is
already a party should have the burden of showing some compelling
interest in his own right, apart from his interest in a class with all
other citizens and creatures of the state, which interest is not prop
erly represented by the state.” 345 U. S., at 373. That standard ap
plies equally well in this case. Although high, the standard is not in
surmountable. See, e.g., Oklahoma v. Texas, 258 U. S. 574, 581. The
Court declines to adopt the Special Master’s proposed intervention
rule, under which nonstate entities may become parties to original
disputes in appropriate and compelling circumstances, such as

