12

SOUTH CAROLINA v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of the Court

to Exceptions of South Carolina to First Interim Report of
Special Master 22 (hereinafter CRWSP Reply). It is diffi­
cult to conceive of a more purely bistate entity.
In addition, the CRWSP relies upon authority granted
by both States to draw water from the Catawba River and
transfer that water from the Catawba River basin. The
CRWSP draws all of its water from an intake located
below the Lake Wylie dam in South Carolina. South
Carolina licensed the CRWSP to withdraw a total of 100
mgd from the Catawba River and issued a certificate to
the CRWSP in 1989 authorizing up to 20 mgd to be trans­
ferred out of the Catawba River basin. Id., at 6–7; Answer
to Bill of Complaint ¶21. Lancaster County currently uses
approximately 2 mgd of this amount, Union County uses
approximately 5 mgd, and the remaining 13 mgd are not
used at this time. CRWSP Reply 7. The CRWSP pumps
Union County’s allocation across the state border pursu­
ant to a parallel certificate issued by North Carolina
authorizing a 5 mgd transfer, ibid., and the complaint
specifically identifies this transfer as contributing to
South Carolina’s harm, Complaint ¶21.
Thus, the
CRWSP’s activities depend upon authority conferred by
both States.
On these facts, we think it is clear that the CRWSP has
carried its burden of showing a compelling interest in the
outcome of this litigation that distinguishes the CRWSP
from all other citizens of the party States. See New Jersey
v. New York, supra, at 373. Apart from its interest as a
user of the Catawba River’s water, the CRWSP has made
a $30 million investment in its plant and infrastructure,
with each participating county incurring approximately
half of this cost as debt. Each county is responsible for
one-half of the CRWSP’s cost of operations, and the ven­
ture is designed to break even from year to year. Any
disruption to the CRWSP’s operations would increase—not
lessen—the difficulty of our task in achieving a “just and

