Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

Opinion of the Court

Catawba River basin, the complaint does not seek relief
against Charlotte directly. Rather, the complaint seeks
relief against all North Carolina-authorized transfers of
water from the Catawba River basin, “past or future,” in
excess of North Carolina’s equitable share. Complaint,
Prayer for Relief ¶2. Charlotte, therefore, occupies a class
of affected North Carolina users of water, and the magni­
tude of Charlotte’s authorized transfer does not distin­
guish it in kind from other members of the class. See New
Jersey v. New York, 345 U. S., at 373, and n. (noting that
Philadelphia represented half of the Pennsylvania’s citi­
zens in the watershed). Nor does Charlotte represent
interstate interests that fall on both sides of this dispute,
as the CRWSP does, such that the viability of Charlotte’s
operations in the face of this litigation is called into ques­
tion. Its interest is solely as a user of North Carolina’s
share of the Catawba River’s water.
Charlotte’s interest falls squarely within the category of
interests with respect to which a State must be deemed to
represent all of its citizens. As we recognized in New
Jersey v. New York, a State’s sovereign interest in ensur­
ing an equitable share of an interstate river’s water is
precisely the type of interest that the State, as parens
patrie, represents on behalf of its citizens. See also United
States v. Nevada, 412 U. S., at 539; Nebraska v. Wyoming,
325 U. S., at 616. That is why, in New Jersey v. New York,
supra, we required that a proposed intervenor show a
compelling interest “in his own right,” distinct from the
collective interest of “all other citizens and creatures of the
state,” whose interest the State presumptively represents
in matters of sovereign policy. Id., at 373. We conclude
that Charlotte has not carried that burden. Thus, respect
for “sovereign dignity” requires us to recognize that North
Carolina properly represents Charlotte in this dispute
over a matter of uniquely sovereign interest. See ibid.
North Carolina’s own statements only reinforce this

