2

SOUTH CAROLINA v. NORTH CAROLINA
Syllabus
where, e.g., the nonstate entity is the instrumentality authorized to
carry out the wrongful conduct or injury for which the complaining
State seeks relief. A compelling reason for allowing citizens to par
ticipate in one original action is not necessarily a compelling reason
for allowing them to intervene in all original actions. Pp. 6–11.
(b) This Court applies the New Jersey v. New York standard to the
proposed intervenors. Pp. 11–18.
(1) The CRWSP should be allowed to intervene. It is an unusual
bistate entity that is jointly owned and regulated by, and supplies
water from the river to, North Carolina’s Union County and South
Carolina’s Lancaster County. It has shown a compelling interest in
protecting the viability of its operations, which are premised on a fine
balance between the joint venture’s two participating counties. The
stresses this litigation would place on the CRWSP threaten to upset
that balance. Moreover, neither State has sufficient interest in main
taining that balance to represent the full scope of the CRWSP’s inter
ests. The complaint attributes a portion of the total water transfers
alleged to have harmed South Carolina to the CRWSP, but North
Carolina cannot represent the joint venture’s interests, since it will
likely respond to the complaint’s demand for a greater share of the
river’s water by taking the position that downstream users—such as
Lancaster County—should receive less water. See, e.g., Colorado v.
New Mexico, 459 U. S. 176, 186–187. Any disruption to the CRWSP’s
operations would increase—not lessen—the difficulty of achieving a
“just and equitable” allocation in this dispute. See Nebraska v. Wyo
ming, 325 U. S. 589, 618. Pp. 11–14.
(2) Duke Energy should also be permitted to intervene. It has
carried its burden of showing unique and compelling interests: It op
erates 11 dams and reservoirs in both States that generate electricity
for the region and control the river’s flow; holds a 50-year federal li
cense governing its hydroelectric power operations; and is the entity
that orchestrated a multistakeholder negotiation process culminating
in a Comprehensive Relicensing Agreement (CRA), signed by 70 enti
ties from both States, which sets the terms under which Duke Energy
has applied to renew its license. These interests will be relevant to
the Court’s ultimate decision, since it is likely that any equitable ap
portionment of the river will need to take into account the amount of
water that Duke Energy needs to sustain its operations. And, there
is no other similarly situated entity on the river, setting Duke’s in
terests apart from the class of all other citizens of the States. Just as
important, Duke Energy has a unique and compelling interest in pro
tecting the terms of its license and as the entity that orchestrated the
CRA, which represents a consensus regarding the appropriate mini
mum continuous flow of river water into South Carolina under a va

