Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of the Court

minimum flow of water that would satisfy South Caro­
lina’s equitable needs, but it does offer a point of reference.
In a recent “multi-stakeholder negotiation process” involv­
ing the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (hereinaf­
ter FERC), Duke Energy, and various groups from both
States, it was agreed, according to the complaint, that
South Carolina should receive from the Catawba River a
continuous flow of water of no less than 1,100 cubic feet
per second, or about 711 mgd. Complaint ¶14.
This negotiated figure may prove unattainable. Accord­
ing to the complaint, natural conditions and periodic
fluctuations have caused the Catawba River’s flow to fall
below 1,100 cubic feet per second. Duke Energy, which
generates hydroelectric power from a series of reservoirs
on the Catawba River, developed a model to estimate the
river’s flow if the river were not impounded. Id., ¶¶8, 16.
The complaint notes that according to Duke Energy’s
model, the Catawba River—even in its natural state—
often would not deliver into South Carolina a minimum
average daily flow of 1,100 cubic feet per second. Id., ¶16;
App. to Motion of State of South Carolina for Leave to File
Complaint, Complaint, and Brief in Support of its Motion
for Leave to File Complaint 18. South Carolina contends
that North Carolina’s authorization of large transfers of
water from the Catawba River basin has exacerbated
these conditions.
Shortly after we granted leave to file the complaint, two
of the entities named in the complaint—the CRWSP and
Duke Energy—filed motions for leave to intervene as
parties. The CRWSP sought leave to intervene as a party­
defendant, asserting its interest as a “riparian user of the
Catawba River” and claiming that this interest was not
adequately represented because of the CRWSP’s “inter­
state nature.” Motion of Catawba River Water Supply
Project for Leave to Intervene and Brief in Support of
Motion 8, 9. Specifically, the CRWSP noted that it is a

