4

SOUTH CAROLINA v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of the Court

bistate entity that is jointly owned and regulated by, and
supplies water to, North Carolina’s Union County and
South Carolina’s Lancaster County. Id., at 9. Duke En­
ergy sought leave to intervene and file an answer, assert­
ing an interest as the operator of 11 dams and reservoirs
on the Catawba River that control the river’s flow, as the
holder of a 50-year license1 governing Duke Energy’s
hydroelectric power operations, and as the entity that
orchestrated the multistakeholder negotiation process
culminating in a Comprehensive Relicensing Agreement
(CRA) signed by 70 entities from both States in 2006.
Duke Energy Carolinas, LLC’s Motion and Brief in Sup­
port of Motion to Intervene and File Answer, and Answer
2, 5. This CRA set forth the terms under which Duke
Energy has applied to renew its FERC license, id., at 5,
and Duke Energy asserted that neither State would repre­
sent its “particular amalgam of federal, state and private
interests,” id., at 14. South Carolina opposed both mo­
tions, and we referred them to the Special Master. 552
U. S. 1160 (2008).
One month later, a third entity named in the complaint,
the city of Charlotte, also sought leave to intervene as a
party-defendant. In its brief, Charlotte asserted an inter­
est, both as the holder of a permit authorizing the transfer
of 33 mgd from the Catawba River basin—the largest
single transfer identified in the complaint—and as the
potential source of the 10 mgd transfer approved for the
cities of Concord and Kannapolis. Motion for Leave to
Intervene of City of Charlotte, North Carolina, and Brief
in Support of Motion 5, 7.2 Charlotte argued that North
——————
1 The license was issued in 1958 to Duke Energy’s predecessor by the
Federal Power Commission, a predecessor of the FERC. For conven­
ience, we will refer to Duke Energy’s “FERC license” herein.
2 Charlotte also asserted an interest in protecting the terms of the
CRA, to which Charlotte was a signatory but to which North Carolina,
which has conflicting duties under §401 of the Clean Water Act, 86

