8

SOUTH CAROLINA v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of the Court

original actions. We therefore decline to adopt the Special
Master’s proposed rule. As the Special Master acknowl­
edged, the Court in New Jersey v. New York, supra, set
down the “appropriate standard” for intervention in origi­
nal actions by nonstate entities. First Interim Rept. 12.
We believe the standard that we applied in that case
applies equally well here.4
In 1929, the State of New Jersey sued the State of New
York and city of New York for their diversion of the Dela­
ware River’s headwaters. 345 U. S., at 370. The Court
granted the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania leave to
intervene, and in 1931, entered a decree enjoining certain
diversions of water by the State of New York and the city
of New York. Id., at 371. In 1952, the city of New York
moved to modify the decree, and New Jersey and Pennsyl­
vania filed oppositions. After the Court referred the mat­
ter to a special master, the city of Philadelphia sought
leave to intervene on the basis of its use of the Delaware
River’s water. Id., at 371–372.
This Court denied Philadelphia leave to intervene.
Pennsylvania had intervened pro interesse suo “to protect
the rights and interests of Philadelphia and Eastern
Pennsylvania in the Delaware River.” Id., at 374; see also
New Jersey v. New York, 283 U. S. 336, 342 (1931). In
view of Pennsylvania’s participation, the Court wrote that
when a State is “a party to a suit involving a matter of
sovereign interest,” it is parens patriae and “ ‘must be
deemed to represent all [of] its citizens.’ ” 345 U. S., at
372–373 (quoting Kentucky v. Indiana, 281 U. S. 163, 173–
——————
4 Accordingly, we need not decide South Carolina’s first exception to
the Special Master’s conclusion that intervention is proper “whenever
the movant is the ‘instrumentality’ authorized to engage in conduct
alleged to harm the plaintiff State, has an ‘independent property
interest’ at issue in the action, or otherwise has a ‘direct stake’ in the
outcome of the action.” Exceptions of State of South Carolina to First
Interim Report of Special Master and Brief in Support of Exceptions i.

