10

SOUTH CAROLINA v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

(FERC)] license and the [Comprehensive Licensing Agree
ment (CRA)] that forms the basis of Duke Energy’s pend
ing renewal application.” Ibid. And the majority contends
that neither State represents these interests because
“[n]either State has signed the CRA or expressed an inten
tion to defend its terms,” and because North Carolina has
even expressed its intent to challenge the terms of the
CRA in this action. Ante, at 16.
Again, all this amounts to is an articulation of the rea
son Duke Energy asserts a particular interest in the wa
ters of the Catawba. Other citizens of North Carolina
doubtless have reasons of their own, ones they find as
important as Duke Energy believes its to be. Weighing
those interests is an “intramural” matter for the State.
New Jersey v. New York, supra, at 373. In addition, the
Federal Government is doubtless familiar with the pend
ing FERC proceedings, and it sees no corresponding need
for us to grant Duke Energy’s motion to intervene. See
Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 20, n. 3.
As for CRWSP, the Special Master concluded that it
should be allowed to intervene, but only because its posi
tion was “similar analytically to Charlotte’s.” First In
terim Report of Special Master, O. T. 2008, No. 138, Orig.,
p. 25. The Court rejects Charlotte’s motion, but nonethe
less allows CRWSP to intervene on a ground not relied
upon by the Special Master. According to the majority,
CRWSP should be allowed to intervene because, as a
bistate entity, its full range of interests cannot be repre
sented entirely by either North or South Carolina. See
ante, at 11–14.
CRWSP’s motion arguably presents a different case
from that of Duke Energy, one not definitively resolved by
this Court in New Jersey v. New York. At the end of the
day, however, I agree with the Special Master’s premise—
CRWSP’s position is really no different from Charlotte’s. I
disagree with her conclusion, of course, because I agree

