Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of the Court

equitable” allocation in this dispute. See Nebraska v.
Wyoming, 325 U. S. 589, 618 (1945). We believe that the
CRWSP has shown a compelling interest in protecting the
viability of its operations, which are premised on a fine
balance between the joint venture’s two participating
counties.
We are further persuaded that neither State can prop­
erly represent the interests of the CRWSP in this litiga­
tion. See New Jersey v. New York, 345 U. S., at 373. The
complaint attributes a portion of the total water transfers
that have harmed South Carolina to the CRWSP, yet
North Carolina expressly states that it “cannot represent
the interests of the joint venture.” Tr. of Oral Arg. 54. A
moment’s reflection reveals why this is so. In this dispute,
as in all disputes over limited resources, each State maxi­
mizes its equitable share of the Catawba River’s water
only by arguing that the other State’s equitable share
must be reduced. See, e.g., Colorado v. New Mexico, 459
U. S. 176, 186–187 (1982). It is thus likely that North
Carolina, in response to South Carolina’s demand for a
greater share of the Catawba River’s water, will take the
position that downstream users—such as Lancaster
County6—should receive less water. See Tr. of Oral Arg.
52 (“From North Carolina’s perspective, South Carolina is
receiving much more water under this negotiated agree­
ment than they could ever hope to achieve in an equitable
apportionment action”). The stresses that this litigation
would place upon the CRWSP threaten to upset the fine
balance on which the joint venture is premised, and nei­
——————
6 As a further complication, we are told, Lancaster County has an
obligation to provide water service to certain customers in Mecklenburg
County, North Carolina. CRWSP Reply 6. Thus, South Carolina may
not be interested in protecting all uses of Lancaster County’s share of
the CRWSP’s water. This additional intermingling of state interests
further supports our conclusion that neither State adequately repre­
sents the CRWSP’s inherently bistate interests.

