Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Wash
ington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 08–472
_________________

KEN L. SALAZAR, SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR, 

ET AL., PETITIONERS v. FRANK BUONO 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF

APPEALS FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT

[April 28, 2010] 


JUSTICE KENNEDY announced the judgment of the Court
and delivered an opinion, in which THE CHIEF JUSTICE
joins and JUSTICE ALITO joins in part.
In 1934, private citizens placed a Latin cross on a rock
outcropping in a remote section of the Mojave Desert.
Their purpose and intent was to honor American soldiers
who fell in World War I. The original cross deteriorated
over time, but a reconstructed one now stands at the same
place. It is on federal land.
The Court is asked to consider a challenge, not to the
first placement of the cross or its continued presence on
federal land, but to a statute that would transfer the cross
and the land on which it stands to a private party. De
partment of Defense Appropriations Act, 2004, Pub. L.
108–87, §8121(a), 117 Stat. 1100. The District Court
permanently enjoined the Government from implementing
the statute. The Court of Appeals affirmed. We conclude
that its judgment was in error.
I
A
The Mojave National Preserve (Preserve) spans ap


2

SALAZAR v. BUONO
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

proximately 1.6 million acres in southeastern California.
The Preserve is nestled within the Mojave Desert, whose
picturesque but rugged territory comprises 25,000 square
miles, exceeding in size the combined area of the Nation’s
five smallest States. See Merriam-Webster’s Geographical
Dictionary 755, 1228–1230 (3d ed. 1997). Just over 90
percent of the land in the Preserve is federally owned,
with the rest owned either by the State of California or by
private parties. The National Park Service, a division of
the Department of the Interior, administers the Preserve
as part of the National Park System.
16 U. S. C.
§§410aaa–41 and 410aaa–46.
Sunrise Rock is a granite outcropping located within the
Preserve. Sunrise Rock and the area in its immediate
vicinity are federal land, but two private ranches are
located less than two miles away. The record does not
indicate whether fencing is used to mark the boundary of
these ranches. In 1934, members of the Veterans of For
eign Wars (VFW) mounted a Latin cross on the rock as a
memorial to soldiers who died in World War I. A Latin
cross consists of two bars—a vertical one and a shorter,
horizontal one. The cross has been replaced or repaired at
various times over the years, most recently in 1998 by
Henry Sandoz. Sandoz is a private citizen who owns land
elsewhere in the Preserve, a portion of which he is pre
pared to transfer to the Government in return for its
conveyance to the VFW of the land on which the cross
stands, all pursuant to the statute now under review.
The cross, as built by Sandoz, consists of 4-inch diame
ter metal pipes painted white. The vertical bar is less
than eight feet tall. It cannot be seen from the nearest
highway, which lies more than 10 miles away. It is visi
ble, however, from Cima Road, a narrow stretch of black
top that comes within 100 feet of Sunrise Rock.
The cross has been a gathering place for Easter services
since it was first put in place; and Sunrise Rock and its


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

immediate area continue to be used as a campsite. At one
time the cross was accompanied by wooden signs stating
“ ‘The Cross, Erected in Memory of the Dead of All Wars,’
and ‘Erected 1934 by Members of Veterans of Foregin [sic]
Wars, Death Valley post 2884.’ ” Buono v. Kempthorne,
527 F. 3d 758, 769 (CA9 2008). The signs have since
disappeared, and the cross now stands unmarked.
B
Frank Buono, respondent here, is a retired Park Service
employee who makes regular visits to the Preserve.
Buono claims to be offended by the presence of a religious
symbol on federal land. He filed suit in the United States
District Court for the Central District of California. He
alleged a violation of the Establishment Clause of the
First Amendment and sought an injunction requiring the
Government to remove the cross.
The litigation proceeded in what can be described as
four stages. In the first, the District Court ruled in
Buono’s favor on opposing motions for summary judgment.
Buono v. Norton, 212 F. Supp. 2d 1202 (CD Cal. 2002)
(Buono I). As an initial matter, the court found that
Buono had standing to maintain his Establishment Clause
challenge. Id., at 1210–1214. On the merits, the parties
agreed that the dispute should be governed by the so
called Lemon test, which the District Court formulated as
follows:
“A government religious practice or symbol will sur
vive an Establishment Clause challenge when it
(1) has a secular purpose, (2) has a primary effect that
neither advances nor inhibits religion, and (3) does
not foster excessive state entanglement with religion.”
Buono I, supra, at 1214–1215 (citing Lemon v. Kurtz
man, 403 U. S. 602, 612–613 (1971)).
The court expressly declined to consider whether the


4

SALAZAR v. BUONO
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

Government’s actions regarding the cross had a secular
purpose, 212 F. Supp. 2d, at 1214–1215, or whether they
caused excessive entanglement with religion, id., at 1217,
n. 9. Instead, the court evaluated the primary effect of the
cross by asking how it would be viewed by a “reasonable
observer.” Id., at 1216. Concluding that presence of the
cross on federal land conveyed an impression of govern
mental endorsement of religion, the court granted Buono’s
request for injunctive relief. The court’s order in Buono I
(2002 injunction) permanently forbade the Government
“from permitting the display of the Latin cross in the area
of Sunrise Rock in the Mojave National Preserve.” App. to
Pet. for Cert. 146a.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Cir
cuit stayed the 2002 injunction to the extent that it re
quired the cross to be removed or dismantled but did not
forbid alternative methods of complying with the order.
The Government covered the cross, first with a tarpaulin
and later with a plywood box.
On appeal, the judgment of the District Court was af
firmed, both as to standing and on the merits of Buono’s
Establishment Clause challenge. Buono v. Norton, 371
F. 3d 543 (CA9 2004) (Buono II). Like the District Court,
the Court of Appeals did not decide whether the Govern
ment’s action, or nonaction, with respect to the cross had
been motivated by a secular purpose. Id., at 550. Its
ruling was based instead on the conclusion that a reason
able observer would perceive a cross on federal land as
governmental endorsement of religion. Id., at 549–550.
The Government did not seek review by this Court, so that
the judgment of the Court of Appeals in Buono II became
final.
C
During the relevant proceedings, Congress enacted
certain statutes related to the cross:


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

(1) Before Buono I was filed, Congress passed an appro
priations bill that included a provision forbidding the use
of governmental funds to remove the cross. Consolidated
Appropriations Act, 2001, Pub. L. 106–554, §133, 114 Stat.
2763A–230.
(2) While Buono I was pending before the District Court,
Congress designated the cross and its adjoining land “as a
national memorial commemorating United States partici
pation in World War I and honoring the American veter
ans of that war.” Department of Defense Appropriations
Act, 2002, Pub. L. 107–117, §8137(a), 115 Stat. 2278. The
Secretary of the Interior was directed to expend up to
$10,000 to acquire a replica of the original cross and its
memorial plaque and to install the plaque at a suitable
nearby location. §8137(c).
(3) Three months after Buono I was decided, Congress
again prohibited the spending of governmental funds to
remove the cross. Department of Defense Appropriations
Act, 2003, Pub. L. 107–248, §8065(b), 116 Stat. 1551.
(4) While the Government’s appeal in Buono II was
pending, Congress passed a statute (land-transfer statute)
directing the Secretary of the Interior to transfer to the
VFW the Government’s interest in the land that had been
designated a national memorial. Department of Defense
Appropriations Act, 2004, Pub. L. 108–87, §8121(a), 117
Stat. 1100. In exchange, the Government was to receive
land elsewhere in the preserve from Henry Sandoz and his
wife. Ibid. Any difference in value between the two par
cels would be equalized through a cash payment.
§§8121(c), (d). The land-transfer statute provided that the
property would revert to the Government if not main
tained “as a memorial commemorating United States
participation in World War I and honoring the American
veterans of that war.” §8121(e), 117 Stat. 1100. The
statute presents a central issue in this case.
The Court of Appeals in Buono II did not address the


6

SALAZAR v. BUONO
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

effect on the suit of a potential land transfer under the
statute. The court noted that the transfer might “take as
long as two years to complete,” 371 F. 3d, at 545, and that
its effect was not yet known, id., at 545–546. The court
thus “express[ed] no view as to whether a transfer com
pleted under [the statute] would pass constitutional mus
ter.” Id., at 546.
D
After the Court of Appeals affirmed in Buono II, Buono
returned to the District Court seeking to prevent the land
transfer. He sought injunctive relief against the transfer,
either through enforcement or modification of the 2002
injunction. In evaluating his request the trial court de
scribed the relevant question as whether the land transfer
was a bona fide attempt to comply with the injunction (as
the Government claimed), or a sham aimed at keeping the
cross in place (as Buono claimed). Buono v. Norton, 364
F. Supp. 2d 1175, 1178 (CD Cal. 2005) (Buono III). In
Buono III, the court did not consider whether the transfer
itself was an “independent violation of the Establishment
Clause.” Id., at 1182, n. 8. The court nevertheless con
cluded that the transfer was an attempt by the Govern
ment to keep the cross atop Sunrise Rock and so was
invalid. The court granted Buono’s motion to enforce the
2002 injunction; denied as moot his motion to amend it;
and permanently enjoined the Government from imple
menting the land-transfer statute. Id., at 1182.
The Court of Appeals again affirmed, largely following
the reasoning of the District Court. Buono v. Kempthorne,
502 F. 3d 1069 (CA9 2007). The Government’s motion for
rehearing en banc was denied over a dissent by Judge
O’Scannlain, 527 F. 3d 758, and this Court granted certio
rari, 555 U. S. ___ (2009).


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

II
Before considering the District Court’s order on the
merits, the first inquiry must be with respect to Buono’s
standing to maintain this action. To demonstrate stand
ing, a plaintiff must have “alleged such a personal stake in
the outcome of the controversy as to warrant his invoca
tion of federal-court jurisdiction.” Horne v. Flores, 557
U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (slip op., at 8) (internal quotation
marks omitted). The Government argues that Buono’s
asserted injury is not personal to him and so does not
confer Article III standing. As noted above, Buono does
not find the cross itself objectionable but instead takes
offense at the presence of a religious symbol on federal
land. Buono does not claim that, as a personal matter, he
has been made to feel excluded or coerced, and so, the
Government contends, he cannot object to the presence of
the cross. Brief for Petitioners 12–17.
Whatever the validity of the objection to Buono’s stand
ing, that argument is not available to the Government at
this stage of the litigation. When Buono moved the Dis
trict Court in Buono I for an injunction requiring the
removal of the cross, the Government raised the same
standing objections it proffers now. Rejecting the Gov
ernment’s position, the District Court entered a judgment
in Buono’s favor, which the Court of Appeals affirmed in
Buono II. The Government did not seek review in this
Court. The judgment became final and unreviewable upon
the expiration of the 90-day deadline under 28 U. S. C.
§2101(c) for filing a petition for certiorari. Toledo Scale
Co. v. Computing Scale Co., 261 U. S. 399, 418 (1923); see
Missouri v. Jenkins, 495 U. S. 33, 45 (1990) (90-day dead
line is “mandatory and jurisdictional”). The Government
cannot now contest Buono’s standing to obtain the final
judgment in Buono I.
Of course, even though the Court may not reconsider
whether Buono had standing to seek the 2002 injunction,


8

SALAZAR v. BUONO
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

it is still necessary to evaluate his standing in Buono III to
seek application of the injunction against the land
transfer statute. That measure of relief is embodied in the
judgment upon which we granted review.
This was a measure of relief that Buono had standing to
seek. A party that obtains a judgment in its favor ac
quires a “judicially cognizable” interest in ensuring com
pliance with that judgment. See Allen v. Wright, 468 U. S.
737, 763 (1984) (plaintiffs’ right to enforce a desegregation
decree to which they were parties is “a personal interest,
created by law, in having the State refrain from taking
specific actions”). Having obtained a final judgment
granting relief on his claims, Buono had standing to seek
its vindication.
The Government does not deny this proposition as a
general matter. Instead, it argues that Buono was not
seeking to vindicate—but rather to extend—the 2002
injunction. The first injunction forbade the Government
from maintaining the cross on Sunrise Rock; yet in Buono
III he sought to preclude the land transfer, a different
governmental action. The Government contends that
Buono lacked standing to seek this additional relief.
Reply Brief for Petitioners 5.
The Government’s argument, however, is properly ad
dressed to the relief granted by the judgment below, not to
Buono’s standing to seek that relief. The Government has
challenged whether appropriate relief was granted in
Buono III in light of the relevant considerations and legal
principles, and we shall consider these questions. The
standing inquiry, by contrast, turns on the alleged injury
that prompted the plaintiff to invoke the court’s jurisdic
tion in the first place. Buono’s entitlement to an injunc
tion having been established in Buono I and II, he sought
in Buono III to prevent the Government from frustrating
or evading that injunction. Based on the rights he ob
tained under the earlier decree—against the same party,


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

regarding the same cross and the same land—his interests
in doing so were sufficiently personal and concrete to
support his standing. Although Buono also argued that
the land transfer should be prohibited as an “independent”
Establishment Clause violation, the District Court did not
address or order relief on that claim, which is not before
us. Buono III, 364 F. Supp. 2d, at 1182, n. 8. This is not a
case in which a party seeks to import a previous standing
determination into a wholly different dispute.
In arguing that Buono sought to extend, rather than to
enforce, the 2002 injunction, the Government in essence
contends that the injunction did not provide a basis for
the District Court to invalidate the land transfer. This is
not an argument about standing but about the merits of
the District Court’s order. Those points now must be
addressed.
III
The procedural history of this litigation must be consid
ered to identify the issues now subject to review. The
District Court granted the 2002 injunction after conclud
ing that a cross on federal land violated the Establishment
Clause. The Government unsuccessfully challenged that
conclusion on appeal, and the judgment became final upon
completion of direct review. At that point, the judgment
“became res judicata to the parties and those in privity
with them, not only as to every matter which was offered
and received to sustain or defeat the claim or demand, but
as to any other admissible matter which might have been
offered for that purpose.” Travelers Indemnity Co. v.
Bailey, 557 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (slip op., at 14) (internal
quotation marks omitted). The Government therefore
does not—and could not—ask this Court to reconsider the
propriety of the 2002 injunction or the District Court’s
reasons for granting it.
The question now before the Court is whether the Dis


10

SALAZAR v. BUONO
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

trict Court properly enjoined the Government from im
plementing the land-transfer statute. The District Court
did not consider whether the statute, in isolation, would
have violated the Establishment Clause, and it did not
forbid the land transfer as an independent constitutional
violation. Buono III, supra, at 1182, n. 8. Rather, the
court enjoined compliance with the statute on the premise
that the relief was necessary to protect the rights Buono
had secured through the 2002 injunction.
An injunction is an exercise of a court’s equitable au
thority, to be ordered only after taking into account all of
the circumstances that bear on the need for prospective
relief. See United States v. Swift & Co., 286 U. S. 106, 114
(1932). See also Weinberger v. Romero-Barcelo, 456 U. S.
305, 312 (1982); Hecht Co. v. Bowles, 321 U. S. 321, 329
(1944); 11A C. Wright, A. Miller, & M. Kane, Federal
Practice and Procedure §2942, pp. 39–42 (2d ed. 1995)
(hereinafter Wright & Miller). Equitable relief is not
granted as a matter of course, see Weinberger, 456 U. S.,
at 311–312, and a court should be particularly cautious
when contemplating relief that implicates public interests,
see id., at 312 (“In exercising their sound discretion, courts
of equity should pay particular regard for the public con
sequences in employing the extraordinary remedy of in
junction”); Harrisonville v. W. S. Dickey Clay Mfg. Co., 289
U. S. 334, 338 (1933) (“Where an important public interest
would be prejudiced, the reasons for denying the injunc
tion may be compelling”). Because injunctive relief “is
drafted in light of what the court believes will be the
future course of events, . . . a court must never ignore
significant changes in the law or circumstances underlying
an injunction lest the decree be turned into an ‘instrument
of wrong.’ ” Wright & Miller §2961, at 393–394 (quoting
Swift & Co., supra, at 115).
Here, the District Court did not engage in the appropri
ate inquiry. The land-transfer statute was a substantial


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

change in circumstances bearing on the propriety of the
requested relief. The court, however, did not acknowledge
the statute’s significance. It examined the events that led
to the statute’s enactment and found an intent to prevent
removal of the cross. Deeming this intent illegitimate, the
court concluded that nothing of moment had changed.
This was error. Even assuming that the land-transfer
statute was an attempt to prevent removal of the cross, it
does not follow that an injunction against its implementa
tion was appropriate.
By dismissing Congress’s motives as illicit, the District
Court took insufficient account of the context in which the
statute was enacted and the reasons for its passage.
Private citizens put the cross on Sunrise Rock to com
memorate American servicemen who had died in World
War I. Although certainly a Christian symbol, the cross
was not emplaced on Sunrise Rock to promote a Christian
message. Cf. County of Allegheny v. American Civil Liber
ties Union, Greater Pittsburgh Chapter, 492 U. S. 573, 661
(1989) (KENNEDY, J., concurring in judgment in part and
dissenting in part) (“[T]he [Establishment] Clause forbids
a city to permit the permanent erection of a large Latin
cross on the roof of city hall . . . because such an obtrusive
year-round religious display would place the government’s
weight behind an obvious effort to proselytize on behalf of
a particular religion”). Placement of the cross on Govern
ment-owned land was not an attempt to set the imprima
tur of the state on a particular creed. Rather, those who
erected the cross intended simply to honor our Nation’s
fallen soldiers. See Brief for Veterans of Foreign Wars of
the United States et al. as Amici Curiae 15 (noting that
the plaque accompanying the cross “was decorated with
VFW decals”).
Time also has played its role. The cross had stood on
Sunrise Rock for nearly seven decades before the statute
was enacted. By then, the cross and the cause it com


12

SALAZAR v. BUONO
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

memorated had become entwined in the public conscious
ness. See ibid. Members of the public gathered regularly
at Sunrise Rock to pay their respects. Rather than let the
cross deteriorate, community members repeatedly took it
upon themselves to replace it. Congress ultimately desig
nated the cross as a national memorial, ranking it among
those monuments honoring the noble sacrifices that con
stitute our national heritage. See note following 16
U. S. C. §431 (listing officially designated national memo
rials, including the National D-Day Memorial and the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial). Research discloses no other
national memorial honoring American soldiers—more
than 300,000 of them—who were killed or wounded in
World War I. See generally A. Leland & M. Oboroceanu,
Congressional Research Service Report for Congress,
American War and Military Operations Casualties: Lists
and Statistics 2 (2009). It is reasonable to interpret the
congressional designation as giving recognition to the
historical meaning that the cross had attained. Cf. Van
Orden v. Perry, 545 U. S. 677, 702–703 (2005) (BREYER, J.,
concurring in judgment) (“40 years” without legal chal
lenge to a Ten Commandments display “suggest that the
public visiting the [surrounding] grounds has considered
the religious aspect of the tablets’ message as part of what
is a broader moral and historical message reflective of a
cultural heritage”).
The 2002 injunction thus presented the Government
with a dilemma. It could not maintain the cross without
violating the injunction, but it could not remove the cross
without conveying disrespect for those the cross was seen
as honoring. Cf. id., at 704 (to invalidate a longstanding
Ten Commandments display might “create the very kind
of religiously based divisiveness that the Establishment
Clause seeks to avoid”). Deeming neither alternative to be
satisfactory, Congress enacted the statute here at issue.
Congress, of course, may not use its legislative powers to


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

reopen final judgments. See Plaut v. Spendthrift Farm,
Inc., 514 U. S. 211, 225–226 (1995). That principle, how
ever, was not a bar to this statute. The Government’s
right to transfer the land was not adjudicated in Buono I
or compromised by the 2002 injunction.
In belittling the Government’s efforts as an attempt to
“evade” the injunction, Buono III, 364 F. Supp. 2d, at
1182, the District Court had things backwards. Con
gress’s prerogative to balance opposing interests and its
institutional competence to do so provide one of the princi
pal reasons for deference to its policy determinations. See
Patsy v. Board of Regents of Fla., 457 U. S. 496, 513
(1982). Here, Congress adopted a policy with respect to
land it now owns in order to resolve a specific controversy.
Congress, the Executive, and the Judiciary all have a duty
to support and defend the Constitution. See United States
v. Nixon, 418 U. S. 683, 703 (1974) (“In the performance of
assigned constitutional duties each branch of the Govern
ment must initially interpret the Constitution, and the
interpretation of its powers by any branch is due great
respect from the others”). The land-transfer statute em
bodies Congress’s legislative judgment that this dispute is
best resolved through a framework and policy of accom
modation for a symbol that, while challenged under the
Establishment Clause, has complex meaning beyond the
expression of religious views. That judgment should not
have been dismissed as an evasion, for the statute brought
about a change of law and a congressional statement of
policy applicable to the case.
Buono maintains that any governmental interest in
keeping the cross up must cede to the constitutional con
cerns on which the 2002 injunction was based. He argues
that the land transfer would be “an incomplete remedy” to
the constitutional violation underlying the injunction and
that the transfer would make achieving a proper remedy
more difficult. Brief for Respondent 54.


14

SALAZAR v. BUONO
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

A court must find prospective relief that fits the remedy
to the wrong or injury that has been established. See
Swift & Co., 286 U. S., at 114 (“A continuing decree of
injunction directed to events to come is subject always to
adaptation as events may shape the need”). See also
United States v. United Shoe Machinery Corp., 391 U. S.
244, 249 (1968). Where legislative action has undermined
the basis upon which relief has previously been granted, a
court must consider whether the original finding of
wrongdoing continues to justify the court’s intervention.
See Railway Employees v. Wright, 364 U. S. 642, 648–649
(1961); Pennsylvania v. Wheeling & Belmont Bridge Co.,
18 How. 421, 430–432 (1856). The relevant question is
whether an ongoing exercise of the court’s equitable au
thority is supported by the prior showing of illegality,
judged against the claim that changed circumstances have
rendered prospective relief inappropriate.
The District Court granted the 2002 injunction based
solely on its conclusion that presence of the cross on fed
eral land conveyed an impression of governmental en
dorsement of religion. The court expressly disavowed any
inquiry into whether the Government’s actions had a
secular purpose or caused excessive entanglement. Buono
I, 212 F. Supp. 2d, at 1215, 1217, n. 9. The Court of Ap
peals affirmed the injunction on the same grounds, simi
larly eschewing any scrutiny of governmental purpose.
Buono II, 371 F. 3d, at 550.
Although, for purposes of the opinion, the propriety of
the 2002 injunction may be assumed, the following discus
sion should not be read to suggest this Court’s agreement
with that judgment, some aspects of which may be ques
tionable. The goal of avoiding governmental endorsement
does not require eradication of all religious symbols in the
public realm. A cross by the side of a public highway
marking, for instance, the place where a state trooper
perished need not be taken as a statement of governmen


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

tal support for sectarian beliefs. The Constitution does
not oblige government to avoid any public acknowledg
ment of religion’s role in society. See Lee v. Weisman, 505
U. S. 577, 598 (1992) (“A relentless and all-pervasive
attempt to exclude religion from every aspect of public life
could itself become inconsistent with the Constitution”).
See also Corporation of Presiding Bishop of Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints v. Amos, 483 U. S. 327,
334 (1987) (“This Court has long recognized that the gov
ernment may (and sometimes must) accommodate reli
gious practices and that it may do so without violating the
Establishment Clause” (internal quotation marks omit
ted)). Rather, it leaves room to accommodate divergent
values within a constitutionally permissible framework.
Even assuming the propriety of the original relief,
however, the question before the District Court in Buono
III was whether to invalidate the land transfer. Given the
sole reliance on perception as a basis for the 2002 injunc
tion, one would expect that any relief grounded on that
decree would have rested on the same basis. But the
District Court enjoined the land transfer on an entirely
different basis: its suspicion of an illicit governmental
purpose. See Buono III, 364 F. Supp. 2d, at 1182. The
court made no inquiry into the effect that knowledge of the
transfer of the land to private ownership would have had
on any perceived governmental endorsement of religion,
the harm to which the 2002 injunction was addressed.
The District Court thus used an injunction granted for one
reason as the basis for enjoining conduct that was alleged
to be objectionable for a different reason. Ordering relief
under such circumstances was improper—absent a finding
that the relief was necessary to address an independent
wrong. See ibid., n. 8 (noting that the court “need not
consider [Buono’s] other contention that the land transfer
itself is an independent violation of the Establishment
Clause”).


16

SALAZAR v. BUONO
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

The District Court should have evaluated Buono’s modi
fication request in light of the objectives of the 2002 in
junction. The injunction was issued to address the im
pression conveyed by the cross on federal, not private,
land. Even if its purpose were characterized more gener
ally as avoiding the perception of governmental endorse
ment, that purpose would favor—or at least not oppose—
ownership of the cross by a private party rather than by
the Government. Cf. Pleasant Grove City v. Summum,
555 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (slip op., at 8) (“[P]ersons who
observe donated monuments routinely—and reasonably—
interpret them as conveying some message on the property
owner’s behalf”).
Buono argues that the cross would continue to stand on
Sunrise Rock, which has no visual differentiation from the
rest of the primarily federally owned Preserve. He also
points to the reversionary clause in the land-transfer
statute requiring that the land be returned to the Gov
ernment if not maintained as a World War I memorial.
Finally, he notes that the cross remains designated a
national memorial by an Act of Congress, which arguably
would prevent the VFW from dismantling the cross even if
it wanted to do so. Brief for Respondent 37–48.
The District Court failed to consider whether, in light of
the change in law and circumstances effected by the land
transfer statute, the “reasonable observer” standard con
tinued to be the appropriate framework through which to
consider the Establishment Clause concerns invoked to
justify the requested relief. As a general matter, courts
considering Establishment Clause challenges do not in
quire into “reasonable observer” perceptions with respect
to objects on private land. Even if, however, this standard
were the appropriate one, but see County of Allegheny, 492
U. S., at 668 (KENNEDY, J., concurring in judgment in part
and dissenting in part) (criticizing the “reasonable ob
server” test); Capitol Square Review and Advisory Bd. v.


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

Pinette, 515 U. S. 753 763–768 (1995) (plurality opinion)
(criticizing reliance on “perceived endorsement”), it is not
clear that Buono’s claim is meritorious. That test requires
the hypothetical construct of an objective observer who
knows all of the pertinent facts and circumstances sur
rounding the symbol and its placement. See id., at 780
(O’Connor, J., concurring in part and concurring in judg
ment). But see id., at 767–768 (plurality opinion) (doubt
ing the workability of the reasonable observer test). Ap
plying this test here, the message conveyed by the cross
would be assessed in the context of all relevant factors.
See Van Orden, 545 U. S., at 700 (BREYER, J., concurring
in judgment) (the Establishment Clause inquiry “must
take account of context and consequences”); Lee, supra, at
597 (“Our Establishment Clause jurisprudence remains a
delicate and fact-sensitive one”).
The District Court did not attempt to reassess the find
ings in Buono I in light of the policy of accommodation
that Congress had embraced. Rather, the District Court
concentrated solely on the religious aspects of the cross,
divorced from its background and context. But a Latin
cross is not merely a reaffirmation of Christian beliefs. It
is a symbol often used to honor and respect those whose
heroic acts, noble contributions, and patient striving help
secure an honored place in history for this Nation and its
people. Here, one Latin cross in the desert evokes far
more than religion. It evokes thousands of small crosses
in foreign fields marking the graves of Americans who fell
in battles, battles whose tragedies are compounded if the
fallen are forgotten.
Respect for a coordinate branch of Government forbids
striking down an Act of Congress except upon a clear
showing of unconstitutionality. See United States v. Mor
rison, 529 U. S. 598, 607 (2000); El Paso & Northeastern
R. Co. v. Gutierrez, 215 U. S. 87, 96 (1909). The same
respect requires that a congressional command be given


18

SALAZAR v. BUONO
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

effect unless no legal alternative exists. Even if, contrary
to the congressional judgment, the land transfer were
thought an insufficient accommodation in light of the
earlier finding of religious endorsement, it was incumbent
upon the District Court to consider less drastic relief than
complete invalidation of the land-transfer statute. See
Ayotte v. Planned Parenthood of Northern New Eng., 546
U. S. 320, 329 (2006) (in granting relief, “we try not to
nullify more of a legislature’s work than is necessary, for
we know that [a] ruling of unconstitutionality frustrates
the intent of the elected representatives of the people”
(internal quotation marks omitted; alteration in original));
Alaska Airlines, Inc. v. Brock, 480 U. S. 678, 684 (1987).
For instance, if there is to be a conveyance, the question
might arise regarding the necessity of further action, such
as signs to indicate the VFW’s ownership of the land. As
we have noted, Congress directed the Secretary of the
Interior to install near the cross a replica of its original
memorial plaque. One of the signs that appears in early
photographs of the cross specifically identifies the VFW as
the group that erected it.
Noting the possibility of specific remedies, however, is
not an indication of agreement about the continued neces
sity for injunctive relief. The land-transfer statute’s bear
ing on this dispute must first be determined. To date, this
Court’s jurisprudence in this area has refrained from
making sweeping pronouncements, and this case is ill
suited for announcing categorical rules. In light of the
finding of unconstitutionality in Buono I, and the highly
fact-specific nature of the inquiry, it is best left to the
District Court to undertake the analysis in the first in
stance. On remand, if Buono continues to challenge im
plementation of the statute, the District Court should
conduct a proper inquiry as described above.


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

*
*
*
The judgment of the Court of Appeals is reversed, and
the case is remanded for further proceedings.
It is so ordered.

