Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

STEVENS, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 08–472
_________________

KEN L. SALAZAR, SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR, 

ET AL., PETITIONERS v. FRANK BUONO 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF

APPEALS FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT

[April 28, 2010] 


JUSTICE STEVENS, with whom JUSTICE GINSBURG and
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR join, dissenting.
In 2002 Congress designated a “five-foot-tall white
cross” located in the Mojave National Preserve “as a na­
tional memorial commemorating United States participa­
tion in World War I and honoring the American veterans
of that war.” Department of Defense Appropriations Act,
Pub. L. 107–117, §8137(a), 115 Stat. 2278. Later that
year, in a judgment not open to question, the District
Court determined that the display of that cross violated
the Establishment Clause because it “convey[ed] a mes­
sage of endorsement of religion.” Buono v. Norton, 212
F. Supp. 2d 1202, 1217 (CD Cal. 2002) (Buono I). The
question in this case is whether Congress’ subsequent
decision to transfer ownership of the property underlying
the cross cured that violation.
“The Establishment Clause, if nothing else, prohibits
government from ‘specifying details upon which men and
women who believe in a benevolent, omnipotent Creator
and Ruler of the world are known to differ.’ ” Van Orden v.
Perry, 545 U. S. 677, 718 (2005) (STEVENS, J., dissenting)
(quoting Lee v. Weisman, 505 U. S. 577, 641 (1992)
(SCALIA, J., dissenting)). A Latin cross necessarily sym­
bolizes one of the most important tenets upon which be­
lievers in a benevolent Creator, as well as nonbelievers,


2

SALAZAR v. BUONO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

are known to differ. In my view, the District Court was
right to enforce its prior judgment by enjoining Congress’
proposed remedy—a remedy that was engineered to leave
the cross intact and that did not alter its basic meaning. I
certainly agree that the Nation should memorialize the
service of those who fought and died in World War I, but it
cannot lawfully do so by continued endorsement of a
starkly sectarian message.
I
As the history recounted by the plurality indicates, this
case comes to us in a procedural posture that significantly
narrows the question presented to the Court. In the first
stage of this litigation, the District Court and the Court of
Appeals ruled that the Government violated the Estab­
lishment Clause by permitting the display of a single
white Latin cross at Sunrise Rock. Those courts further
ruled that the appropriate remedy was an injunction
prohibiting the Government from “permitting the display
of the Latin cross in the area of Sunrise Rock in the Mo­
jave National Preserve.” App. 39. The Government de­
clined to seek a writ of certiorari following those rulings.
Accordingly, for the purpose of this case, it is settled that
“the Sunrise Rock cross will project a message of govern­
ment endorsement [of religion] to a reasonable observer,”
Buono v. Norton, 371 F. 3d 543, 549 (CA9 2004) (Buono
II), and that the District Court’s remedy for that endorse­
ment was proper.
We are, however, faced with an additional fact: Con­
gress has enacted a statute directing the Secretary of the
Interior to transfer a 1-acre parcel of land containing the
cross to the Veterans of Foreign Wars (VFW), subject to
certain conditions, in exchange for a 5-acre parcel of land
elsewhere in the Preserve. See Department of Defense
Appropriations Act, 2004, Pub. L. 108–87, §8121, 117 Stat.
1100. The District Court found that the land transfer


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

STEVENS, J., dissenting

under §8121 “violate[d] [the] court’s judgment ordering a
permanent injunction” and did not “actually cur[e] the
continuing Establishment Clause violation.” Buono v.
Norton, 364 F. Supp. 2d 1175, 1182 (CD Cal. 2005) (Buono
III). The District Court therefore enforced its 2002 judg­
ment by enjoining the transfer, without considering
whether “the land transfer itself is an independent viola­
tion of the Establishment Clause.” Ibid., n. 8. Because
the District Court did not base its decision upon an inde­
pendent Establishment Clause violation, the constitution­
ality of the land-transfer statute is not before us. See
ante, at 10. Instead, the question we confront is whether
the District Court properly enforced its 2002 judgment by
enjoining the transfer.
In answering that question we, like the District Court,
must first consider whether the transfer would violate the
2002 injunction. We must then consider whether changed
circumstances nonetheless rendered enforcement of that
judgment inappropriate; or conversely whether they made
it necessary for the District Court to bar the transfer, even
if the transfer is not expressly prohibited by the prior
injunction, in order to achieve the intended objective of the
injunction. The plurality correctly notes that “ ‘a court
must never ignore significant changes in the law or cir­
cumstances underlying an injunction,’ ” ante, at 10 (quot­
ing 11A C. Wright, A. Miller, & M. Kane, Federal Practice
and Procedure §2961, pp. 393–394 (2d ed. 1995) (hereinaf­
ter Wright & Miller)), and “ ‘[a] continuing decree of in­
junction directed to events to come is subject always to
adaptation as events may shape the need,’ ” ante, at 14
(quoting United States v. Swift & Co., 286 U. S. 106, 114
(1932)).1 At the same time, it is axiomatic that when a
——————
1 One point of contention: I accept as a general matter that a court
must consider whether “legislative action has undermined the basis
upon which relief has previously been granted.” Ante, at 14. But the


4

SALAZAR v. BUONO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

party seeks to enforce or modify an injunction, the only
circumstances that matter are changed circumstances.
See Swift, 286 U. S., at 119 (“The injunction, whether
right or wrong, is not subject to impeachment in its appli­
cation to the conditions that existed at its making”).
I further accept that the District Court’s task was to
evaluate the changed circumstances “in light of the objec­
tives of the 2002 injunction.” Ante, at 16. This case does
not simply pit a plaintiff’s “prior showing of illegality”
against a defendant’s claim that “changed circumstances
have rendered prospective relief inappropriate.” Ante, at
14. That formulation implies that the changed circum­
stances all cut in one direction, against prospective relief,
and that the defendant has asked the court to alleviate its
obligations. But it is important to note that in this case,
the Government did not move to “alleviate or eliminate
conditions or restrictions imposed by the original decree”
so as to permit the transfer. Wright & Miller §2961, at
397. Rather, it was the beneficiary of the original injunc­
tion who went back into court seeking its enforcement or
modification in light of the transfer. Plainly, respondent
had standing to seek enforcement of a decree in his favor.2
——————
effect of the legislative action in this case is different from its effect in
our cases espousing that principle, which stand for the proposition that
if a statutory “right has been modified by the competent authority”
since the decree, then an injunction enforcing the prior version of that
right must be modified to conform to the change in the law. Pennsyl
vania v. Wheeling & Belmont Bridge Co., 18 How. 421, 432 (1856); see
also Railway Employees v. Wright, 364 U. S. 642, 651 (1961) (“In a case
like this the District Court’s authority to adopt a consent decree comes
only from the statute which the decree is intended to enforce. . . . [I]t
[must] be free to modify the terms of a consent decree when a change in
law brings those terms in conflict with statutory objectives”). In a
constitutional case such as this, legislative action may modify the facts,
but it cannot change the applicable law.
2 To the extent the Government challenges respondent’s standing to
seek the initial injunction, that issue is not before the Court for the
reasons the plurality states. See ante, at 7. Moreover, in my view


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

STEVENS, J., dissenting

Respondent argued that such action was necessary,
either to enforce the plain terms of the 2002 injunction or
to “achieve the purposes of the provisions of the decree,”
United States v. United Shoe Machinery Corp., 391 U. S.
244, 249 (1968); see Wright & Miller §2961, at 393 (“[A]
court must continually be willing to redraft the order at
the request of the party who obtained equitable relief in
order to insure that the decree accomplishes its intended
result”). Only at that point did the Government argue
that changed circumstances made prospective relief un­
necessary. This difference in focus is a subtle one, but it is
important to emphasize that the question that was before
the District Court—and that is now before us—is whether
enjoining the transfer was necessary to effectuate the
letter or logic of the 2002 judgment.
Although I agree with the plurality’s basic framework, I
disagree with its decision to remand the case to the Dis­
trict Court. The District Court already “engage[d] in the
appropriate inquiry,” ante, at 10, and it was well within its
rights to enforce the 2002 judgment. First, the District
——————
respondent has standing even under the analysis that JUSTICE SCALIA
undertakes. It is not at all “speculative,” ante, at 4 (opinion concurring
in judgment), that the VFW will continue to display the cross. VFW
Post 385, the beneficiary of the land transfer, has filed an amici brief in
this case indicating it “intends to maintain and preserve the Veterans
Memorial,” Brief for Veterans of Foreign Wars of the United States
et al. as Amici Curiae 4, by which it means the cross, id., at 7 (identify­
ing the Veterans Memorial as the “cross and plaque”). Respondent did,
in his amended complaint, aver that he was offended specifically “by
the display of a Latin Cross on government-owned property.” App. 50.
But his claimed injury is that he is “unable to freely use the area of the
Preserve around the cross,” Buono v. Norton, 371 F. 3d 543, 547 (CA9
2004) (Buono II) (internal quotation marks omitted), because the
Government’s unconstitutional endorsement of the cross will induce
him to avoid the Sunrise Rock area, even though it offers the most
convenient route to the Preserve, App. 65. That endorsement and
respondent’s resulting injury not only persist, but have been aggra­
vated by the Government’s actions since the complaint was filed.


6

SALAZAR v. BUONO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

Court properly recognized that the transfer was a means
of “permitting”—indeed, encouraging—the display of the
cross. The transfer therefore would violate the terms of
the court’s original injunction. Second, even if the transfer
would not violate the terms of the 2002 injunction, the
District Court properly took into account events that
transpired since 2002 and determined that barring the
transfer was necessary to achieve the intended result of
the 2002 decree, as the transfer would not eliminate gov­
ernment endorsement of religion.
II
The first step in the analysis is straightforward: The
District Court had to ask whether the transfer of the
property would violate the extant injunction. Under the
terms of that injunction, the answer was yes.
The 2002 injunction barred the Government from “per­
mitting the display of the Latin cross in the area of Sun­
rise Rock in the Mojave National Preserve.” App. 39. The
land-transfer statute mandated transfer of the land to an
organization that has announced its intention to maintain
the cross on Sunrise Rock. That action surely “permit[s]”
the display of the cross. See 11 Oxford English Dictionary
578 (2d ed. 1989) (defining “permit” as “[t]o admit or allow
the doing or occurrence of; to give leave or opportunity
for”). True, the Government would no longer exert direct
control over the cross. But the transfer itself would be an
act permitting its display.
I therefore disagree with JUSTICE SCALIA that the “only
reasonable reading of the original injunction . . . is that it
proscribed the cross’s display on federal land.” Ante, at 2
(opinion concurring in judgment). If the land were already
privately owned, JUSTICE SCALIA may be correct that the
cross’ display on Sunrise Rock would not violate the in­
junction because the Government would not have to do
anything to allow the cross to stand, and the Government


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

STEVENS, J., dissenting

could try to prevent its display only by making such a
display illegal. But the Government does own this land,
and the transfer statute requires the Executive Branch to
take an affirmative act (transfer to private ownership)
designed to keep the cross in place. In evaluating a claim
that the Government would impermissibly “permit” the
cross’ display by effecting a transfer, a court cannot
start from a baseline in which the cross has already been
transferred.
Moreover, §8121 was designed specifically to foster the
display of the cross. Regardless of why the Government
wanted to “accommodat[e]” the interests associated with
its display, ante, at 13 (plurality opinion), it was not only
foreseeable but also intended that the cross would remain
standing. Indeed, so far as the record indicates, the Gov­
ernment had no other purpose for turning over this land to
private hands. It was therefore proper for the District
Court to find that the transfer would violate its 2002
injunction and to enforce that injunction against the
transfer.
III
As already noted, it was respondent, the beneficiary of
the injunction, who moved the District Court for relief.
When the beneficiary of an injunction seeks relief “to
achieve the purposes of the provisions of the decree,”
United Shoe Machinery Corp., 391 U. S., at 249, a district
court has the authority to “modify the decree so as to
achieve the required result with all appropriate expedi­
tion,” id., at 252. Thus, regardless of whether the transfer
was prohibited by the plain terms of the 2002 judgment,
the District Court properly inquired into whether enjoin­
ing the transfer was necessary to achieve the objective of
that judgment. The Government faces a high burden in
arguing the District Court exceeded its authority. A de­
cree “may not be changed in the interests of the defen­


8

SALAZAR v. BUONO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

dants if the purposes of the litigation . . . have not been
fully achieved.” Id., at 248 (emphasis deleted). And con­
trary to the Government’s position, the changed circum­
stances in this case support, rather than count against,
the District Court’s enforcement decision.
The objective of the 2002 judgment, as the plurality
grudgingly allows, was to “avoi[d] the perception of gov­
ernmental endorsement” of religion. Ante, at 16; see
Buono III, 364 F. Supp. 2d, at 1178 (analyzing “ ‘whether
government action endorsing religion has actually ceased’ ”
in light of the transfer). The parties do not disagree on
this point; rather, they dispute whether the transfer would
end government endorsement of the cross. Compare Brief
for Petitioners 21 (“Congress’s transfer of the land . . .
ends any governmental endorsement of the cross”) with
Brief for Respondent 34 (“[T]he government’s endorsement
of the Christian cross is not remedied” by the land trans­
fer). The District Court rightly found that the transfer
would not end government endorsement of the cross.
A government practice violates the Establishment
Clause if it “either has the purpose or effect of ‘endorsing’
religion.” County of Allegheny v. American Civil Liberties
Union, Greater Pittsburgh Chapter, 492 U. S. 573, 592
(1989). “Whether the key word is ‘endorsement,’ ‘favorit­
ism,’ or ‘promotion,’ the essential principle remains the
same. The Establishment Clause, at the very least, pro­
hibits government from appearing to take a position on
questions of religious belief or from ‘making adherence to
a religion relevant in any way to a person’s standing
in the political community.’ ” Id., at 593–594 (quoting
Lynch v. Donnelly, 465 U. S. 668, 687 (1984) (O’Connor, J.,
concurring)).
The 2002 injunction was based on a finding that display
of the cross had the effect of endorsing religion. That is,
“the Sunrise Rock cross . . . project[s] a message of gov­
ernment endorsement [of religion] to a reasonable ob­


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

STEVENS, J., dissenting

server.” Buono II, 371 F. 3d, at 549. The determination
that the Government had endorsed religion necessarily
rested on two premises: first, that the Government en­
dorsed the cross, and second, that the cross “take[s] a
position on questions of religious belief” or “ ‘mak[es] ad­
herence to religion relevant . . . to a person’s standing in
the political community,’ ” County of Allegheny, 492 U. S.,
at 594. Taking the District Court’s 2002 finding of an
Establishment Clause violation as res judicata, as we
must, the land transfer has the potential to dislodge only
the first of those premises, in that the transfer might
change the Government’s endorsing relationship with the
cross. As I explain below, I disagree that the transfer
ordered by §8121 would in fact have this result. But it is
also worth noting at the outset that the transfer statute
could not (and does not) dislodge the second premise—that
the cross conveys a religious message. Continuing gov­
ernment endorsement of the cross is thus continuing
government endorsement of religion.
In my view, the transfer ordered by §8121 would not end
government endorsement of the cross for two independ­
ently sufficient reasons. First, after the transfer it would
continue to appear to any reasonable observer that the
Government has endorsed the cross, notwithstanding that
the name has changed on the title to a small patch of
underlying land. This is particularly true because the
Government has designated the cross as a national memo­
rial, and that endorsement continues regardless of
whether the cross sits on public or private land. Second,
the transfer continues the existing government endorse­
ment of the cross because the purpose of the transfer is to
preserve its display. Congress’ intent to preserve the
display of the cross maintains the Government’s endorse­
ment of the cross.
The plurality does not conclude to the contrary; that is,
it does not decide that the transfer would end government


10

SALAZAR v. BUONO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

endorsement of the cross and the religious message it
conveys. Rather, the plurality concludes that the District
Court did not conduct an appropriate analysis, and it
remands the case for a do-over. I take up each of the
purported faults the plurality finds in the District Court’s
analysis in my examination of the reasons why the trans­
fer does not cure the existing Establishment Clause
violation.
Perception of the Cross Post-Transfer
The 2002 injunction was based upon a finding of im­
permissible effect: The “Sunrise Rock cross . . . project[s] a
message of government endorsement [of religion] to a
reasonable observer.” Buono II, 371 F. 3d, at 549. The
transfer would not end that impermissible state of affairs
because the cross, post-transfer, would still have “the
effect of communicating a message of government en­
dorsement . . . of religion.” Lynch, 465 U. S., at 692
(O’Connor, J., concurring). As the Court of Appeals cor­
rectly found, “[n]othing in the present posture of the case
alters” the conclusion that a “reasonable observer would
perceive governmental endorsement of the message” the
cross conveys. Buono v. Kempthorne, 527 F. 3d 758, 783
(CA9 2008) (Buono IV).3
——————
3 The

plurality faults the District Court for not engaging in this
analysis, but the District Court did implicitly consider how a reason­
able observer would perceive the cross post-transfer when it analyzed
the terms of the transfer, the Government’s continuing property rights
in the conveyed land, and the history of the Government’s efforts to
preserve the cross. Furthermore, the Court of Appeals affirmed the
District Court’s order on the express ground that a reasonable observer
would still perceive government endorsement of the cross. See Buono
IV, 527 F. 3d, at 782–783.
THE CHIEF JUSTICE suggests this is much ado about nothing because
respondent’s counsel conceded that the injunction would not be violated
were the Government to have gone through an “empty ritual” of taking
down the cross before transferring the land. Ante, at 1 (concurring
opinion). But in the colloquy to which THE CHIEF JUSTICE refers,


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

STEVENS, J., dissenting

In its original judgment, the Court of Appeals found
that a well-informed reasonable observer would perceive
government endorsement of religion, notwithstanding the
cross’ initial “placement by private individuals,” based
upon the following facts: “that the cross rests on public
land[,] . . . that Congress has designated the cross as a war
memorial and prohibited the use of funds to remove it, and
that the Park Service has denied similar access for expres­
sion by an adherent of the . . . Buddhist faith.” Buono II,
371 F. 3d, at 550. After the transfer, a well-informed
observer would know that the cross was no longer on
public land, but would additionally be aware of the follow­
ing facts: The cross was once on public land, the Govern­
ment was enjoined from permitting its display, Congress
transferred it to a specific purchaser in order to preserve
its display in the same location, and the Government
maintained a reversionary interest in the land. From this
chain of events, in addition to the factors that remain the
same after the transfer, he would perceive government
endorsement of the cross.4
——————
counsel assumed that the Government would not retain a reversionary
interest in the land, and that the cross would not retain its designation
as a national memorial. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 44–45. Even under THE
CHIEF JUSTICE’s revised version of the hypothetical, I would not so
quickly decide that taking down the cross makes no material difference.
And counsel’s statement takes no position as to whether the hypotheti­
cal poses any constitutional problem independent of the injunction.
Regardless, we must deal with the substance of the case before us,
which involves much more than Congress directing the Government to
execute a simple land transfer.
4 A less informed reasonable observer, see Capitol Square Review and
Advisory Bd. v. Pinette, 515 U. S. 753, 807 (1995) (STEVENS, J., dissent­
ing), would reach the same conclusion because the cross would still
appear to stand on Government property. The transfer merely “carv[es]
out a tiny parcel of property in the midst of this vast Preserve—like a
donut hole with the cross atop it.” Buono v. Kempthorne, 527 F. 3d
758, 783 (CA9 2008). For any reasonable observer, then, the transfer
simply would not change the effect of the cross.


12

SALAZAR v. BUONO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

Particularly important to this analysis is that although
the transfer might remove the implicit endorsement that
presence on public land signifies, see Capitol Square
Review and Advisory Bd. v. Pinette, 515 U. S. 753, 801
(1995) (STEVENS, J., dissenting) (“The very fact that a sign
is installed on public property implies official recognition
and reinforcement of its message”), it would not change
the fact that the Government has taken several explicit
actions to endorse this cross. In its decision upholding the
initial entry of the injunction, the Court of Appeals found
those actions contributed to a reasonable observer’s per­
ception of government endorsement. Buono II, 371 F. 3d,
at 550. Their significance does not depend upon the own­
ership of the land.
In 2000, and again after the District Court had entered
its initial injunction, Congress passed legislation prohibit­
ing the use of any federal funds to remove the cross from
its location on federal property. See Consolidated Appro­
priations Act, 2001, Pub. L. 106–554, App. D, §133, 114
Stat. 2763A–230; Department of Defense Appropriations
Act, 2003, Pub. L. 107–248, §8065(b), 116 Stat. 1551.
Thus, beyond merely acquiescing in the continued pres­
ence of a cross on federal property, Congress singled out
that cross for special treatment, and it affirmatively com­
manded that the cross must remain.
Congress also made a more dramatic intervention.
Without the benefit of any committee hearings or floor
debate in either the Senate or the House of Representa­
tives—indeed, without a moment of discussion in any
official forum—Congress passed legislation officially des­
ignating the “five-foot-tall white cross” in the Mojave
Desert “as a national memorial commemorating United
States participation in World War I and honoring the
American veterans of that war.” §8137(a), 115 Stat. 2278.
Thereafter, the cross was no longer just a local artifact; it
acquired a formal national status of the highest order.


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

STEVENS, J., dissenting

Once that momentous step was taken, changing the iden­
tity of the owner of the underlying land could no longer
change the public or private character of the cross. The
Government has expressly adopted the cross as its own.5
Even though Congress recognized this cross for its
military associations, the solitary cross conveys an ines­
capably sectarian message. See Separation of Church and
State Comm. v. Eugene, 93 F. 3d 617, 626 (CA9 1996)
(O’Scannlain, J., concurring in result) (“[T]he City’s use of
a cross to memorialize the war dead may lead observers to
believe that the City has chosen to honor only Christian
veterans”). As the District Court observed, it is undis­
puted that the “[L]atin cross is the preeminent symbol of
Christianity. It is exclusively a Christian symbol, and not
a symbol of any other religion.” Buono I, 212 F. Supp. 2d,
at 1205. We have recognized the significance of the Latin
cross as a sectarian symbol,6 and no participant in this
——————
5 The plurality barely mentions this designation, except to assert that
the designation gave recognition to the historical meaning of the cross.
See ante, at 12. But the plurality does not acknowledge that when the
Ninth Circuit affirmed the 2002 judgment, it concluded that the desig­
nation is one of the factors that would lead a reasonable observer to
perceive government endorsement of religion. See Buono II, 371 F. 3d,
at 550. Nor does the plurality address the effect of that designation on
a reasonable observer’s perception of the cross, regardless of whether
the cross sits on private land. See ante, at 16.
6 See, e.g., Pinette, 515 U. S., at 760 (characterizing Ku Klux Klan­
sponsored cross as religious speech); id., at 776 (O’Connor, J., concur­
ring in part and concurring in judgment) (“[T]he cross is an especially
potent sectarian symbol”); id., at 792 (Souter, J., concurring in part and
concurring in judgment) (“[T]he Latin cross . . . is the principal symbol
of Christianity around the world, and display of the cross alone could
not reasonably be taken to have any secular point”); id., at 798, n. 3
(STEVENS, J., dissenting) (“[T]he Latin cross is identifiable as a symbol
of a particular religion, that of Christianity; and, further, as a symbol of
particular denominations within Christianity”); County of Allegheny v.
American Civil Liberties Union, Greater Pittsburgh Chapter, 492 U. S.
573, 661 (1989) (KENNEDY, J., concurring in judgment in part and
dissenting in part) (“[T]he [Establishment] Clause forbids a city to


14

SALAZAR v. BUONO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

litigation denies that the cross bears that social meaning.
Making a plain, unadorned Latin cross a war memorial
does not make the cross secular. It makes the war memo­
rial sectarian.7
More fundamentally, however, the message conveyed by
the cross is not open to reconsideration given the posture
of this case. The plurality employs a revealing turn of
phrase when it characterizes the cross as “a symbol that,
while challenged under the Establishment Clause, has
complex meaning beyond the expression of religious
views.” Ante, at 13. The days of considering the cross
itself as challenged under the Establishment Clause are
over; it is settled that the Government is not permitted to
endorse the cross. However complex the meaning of the
cross, the Court of Appeals in 2004 considered and re­
jected the argument that its dual symbolism as a war
memorial meant that government endorsement of the
cross did not amount to endorsement of religion. See
Buono II, 371 F. 3d, at 549, n. 5. All we are debating at
——————
permit the permanent erection of a large Latin cross on the roof of city
hall . . . because such an obtrusive year-round religious display would
place the government’s weight behind an obvious effort to proselytize
on behalf of a particular religion”).
7 Context is critical to the Establishment Clause inquiry, and not
every use of a religious symbol in a war memorial would indicate
government endorsement of a religious message. See, e.g., Van Orden
v. Perry, 545 U. S. 677, 701 (2005) (BREYER, J., concurring in judgment)
(“[T]o determine the message that the text here conveys, we must
examine how the text is used. And that inquiry requires us to consider
the context of the display”); County of Allegheny, 492 U. S., at 598
(“[T]he effect of a crèche display turns on its setting”); Lynch v. Don
nelly, 465 U. S. 668, 694 (1984) (O’Connor, J., concurring) (“Every
government practice must be judged in its unique circumstances to
determine whether it constitutes an endorsement or disapproval of
religion”). But this cross is not merely one part of a more elaborate
monument that, taken as a whole, may be understood to convey a
primarily nonreligious message. Rather, the cross is the only symbol
conveying any message at all.


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

STEVENS, J., dissenting

this juncture is whether the shift from public to private
ownership of the land sufficiently distanced the Govern­
ment from the cross; we are no longer debating the mes­
sage the cross conveys to a reasonable observer. In argu­
ing that Congress can legitimately favor the cross because
of its purported double meaning, the plurality implicitly
tries to reopen what is closed.8
The plurality also poses a different objection to consid­
eration of whether the transfer would change a reasonable
observer’s perception of the cross. The plurality suggests
that the “ ‘reasonable observer’ standard” may not “be the
appropriate framework” because “courts considering Es­
tablishment Clause challenges do not,” as a general mat­
ter, “inquire into ‘reasonable observer’ perceptions with
respect to objects on private land.” Ante, at 16. Once
again, the plurality’s approach fails to pay heed to the
posture of this case.
At the risk of stating the obvious, respondent is not
simply challenging a private object on private land. Al­
though “an Establishment Clause violation must be
moored in government action of some sort,” Pinette, 515
U. S., at 779 (O’Connor, J., concurring in part and concur­
——————
8 The plurality’s assertions regarding the meaning of the cross are
therefore beside the point. For the record, however, I cannot agree that
a bare cross such as this conveys a nonsectarian meaning simply
because crosses are often used to commemorate “heroic acts, noble
contributions, and patient striving” and to honor fallen soldiers. Ante,
at 17. The cross is not a universal symbol of sacrifice. It is the symbol
of one particular sacrifice, and that sacrifice carries deeply significant
meaning for those who adhere to the Christian faith. The cross has
sometimes been used, it is true, to represent the sacrifice of an individ­
ual, as when it marks the grave of a fallen soldier or recognizes a state
trooper who perished in the line of duty. Even then, the cross carries a
religious meaning. But the use of the cross in such circumstances is
linked to, and shows respects for, the individual honoree’s faith and
beliefs. I, too, would consider it tragic if the Nation’s fallen veterans
were to be forgotten. See ibid. But there are countless different ways,
consistent with the Constitution, that such an outcome may be averted.


16

SALAZAR v. BUONO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

ring in judgment), respondent’s objection to the transfer
easily meets that test for two reasons. First, he is cur­
rently challenging official legislation, taken in response to
an identified Establishment Clause violation. That legis­
lation would transfer public land to a particular private
party, with the proviso that the transferee must use the
land to fulfill a specific public function or else the land
reverts back to the Government. Second, even once the
transfer is complete, the cross would remain a national
memorial. The cross is therefore not a purely “private”
object in any meaningful sense.
Notwithstanding these facts, the plurality appears to
conclude that the transfer might render the cross purely
private speech. It relies in part on the plurality opinion in
Pinette for its suggestion that the reasonable observer
standard may not be apposite, and Pinette addressed a
privately owned cross displayed in a public forum. The
Pinette plurality would have rejected the idea that “a
neutrally behaving government” can ever endorse “private
religious expression,” id., at 764, even if a reasonable
observer would perceive government endorsement, id., at
768. But the Pinette plurality acknowledged that govern­
ment favoritism of private religious speech is unconstitu­
tional, as when a government “giv[es] sectarian religious
speech preferential access to a forum close to the seat of
government (or anywhere else for that matter).” Id., at
766. And in this case, the Government is not acting neu­
trally: The transfer statute and the government actions
preceding it have all favored the cross.
Furthermore, even assuming (wrongly) that the cross
would be purely private speech after the transfer, and
even assuming (quite implausibly) that the transfer stat­
ute is neutral with respect to the cross, it would still be
appropriate for the District Court to apply the reasonable
observer standard. The majority of the Pinette Court
rejected the per se rule proposed by the plurality. Instead,


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

STEVENS, J., dissenting

the relevant standard provides that the Establishment
Clause is violated whenever “the State’s own actions . . . ,
and their relationship to the private speech at issue, actu
ally convey a message of endorsement.” Id., at 777
(O’Connor, J., concurring in part and concurring in judg­
ment). Moreover, the Establishment Clause “imposes
affirmative obligations that may require a State, in some
situations, to take steps to avoid being perceived as sup­
porting or endorsing a private religious message.” Ibid. It
is particularly appropriate in this context—when the issue
is whether the transfer cures an already identified Estab­
lishment Clause violation—for the District Court to con­
sider whether the Government, by complying with §8121,
would have taken sufficient steps to avoid being perceived
as endorsing the cross.
As I explained at the outset of this section, the answer
to that inquiry is surely no. The reasonable observer “who
knows all of the pertinent facts and circumstances sur­
rounding the symbol and its placement,” ante, at 17, would
perceive that the Government has endorsed the cross: It
prohibited the use of federal funds to take down the cross,
designated the cross as a national memorial, and engaged
in “herculean efforts to preserve the Latin cross” following
the District Court’s initial injunction, Buono III, 364
F. Supp. 2d, at 1182. Those efforts include a transfer
statute designed to keep the cross in place. Changing the
ownership status of the underlying land in the manner
required by §8121 would not change the fact that the cross
conveys a message of government endorsement of religion.
Purpose in Enacting the Transfer Statute
Even setting aside that the effect of the post-transfer
cross would still be to convey a message of government
endorsement of religion, the District Court was correct to
conclude that §8121 would not cure the Establishment
Clause violation because the very purpose of the transfer


18

SALAZAR v. BUONO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

was to preserve the display of the cross. That evident
purpose maintains government endorsement of the cross.
The plurality does not really contest that this was Con­
gress’ purpose, ante, at 11, so I need not review the evi­
dence in great detail. Suffice it to say that the record
provides ample support. The land-transfer statute author­
izes a conveyance to the particular recipient that has
expressed an intent to preserve the cross. See Brief for
Veterans of Foreign Wars of the United States et al. as
Amici Curiae 4 (transfer recipient “intends to maintain
and preserve the Veterans Memorial”); id., at 7 (identify­
ing Veterans Memorial as the “cross and plaque”). And it
conveys the particular land that has already been desig­
nated “as a national memorial” commemorating the veter­
ans of World War I, §8121(a), 117 Stat. 1100, subject to a
reversionary clause requiring that a memorial “commemo­
rating United States participation in World War I and
honoring the American veterans of that war” be main­
tained, §8121(e). If it does not categorically require the
new owner of the property to display the existing memo­
rial meeting that description (the cross), see §8137, 115
Stat. 2278, the statute most certainly encourages this
result. Indeed, the Government concedes that Congress
sought to “preserve a longstanding war memorial” at the
site, Brief for Petitioners 28 (emphasis added), and the
only memorial that could be “preserved” at Sunrise Rock is
the cross itself.
The plurality insists, however, that even assuming the
purpose of the land transfer was to preserve the display of
the cross, enjoining the transfer was not necessarily ap­
propriate. It contends the District Court failed to give
adequate consideration to “the context in which the [land­
transfer] statute was enacted and the reasons for its pas­
sage,” ante, at 11, and it directs the District Court’s atten­
tion to three factors: the message intended by the private
citizens who first erected the cross, ibid.; the time the


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

STEVENS, J., dissenting

cross stood on Sunrise Rock and its historical meaning,
ante, at 11–12; and Congress’ balancing of “opposing inter­
ests” and selection of a “policy of accommodation,” ante, at
13; see also ante, at 17.
The first two of these factors are red herrings. The
District Court, in its enforcement decision, had no occasion
to consider anew either the private message intended by
those who erected the cross or how long the cross had
stood atop Sunrise Rock. Neither of these factors consti­
tuted a novel or changed circumstance since the entry of
the 2002 injunction. Whatever message those who ini­
tially erected the cross intended—and I think we have to
presume it was a Christian one, at least in part, for the
simple reason that those who erected the cross chose to
commemorate American veterans in an explicitly Chris­
tian manner—that historical fact did not change between
2002 and 2005. I grant that the amount of time the cross
had stood on Sunrise Rock did change, from 68 years to 71
years, but no one can seriously maintain that “the histori­
cal meaning that the cross had attained,” ante, at 12, was
materially transformed in that 3-year increment.9
——————
9 I also disagree with the plurality’s factual premise that “the cross
and the cause it commemorated had become entwined in the public
consciousness” in a secular manner, ante, at 11–12. Although some
members of the community knew that the cross had been originally
erected as a war memorial, there is no support in the record for the idea
that members of the public “gathered regularly at Sunrise Rock to pay
their respects,” ibid., to the fallen of World War I or any other veterans.
The study conducted by a National Park Service historian indicates
that a group of veterans gathered at the cross as early as 1935 for
Easter sunrise services. Memorandum from Mark Luellen to Superin­
tendent, Mojave National Preserve (Jan. 31, 2000), Decl. of Peter J.
Eliasberg in Buono v. Norton, No. EDCV 01–216–RT (CD Cal., Mar. 13,
2002), p. 20 (Exh. 7). But there is no evidence that gatherings were
ever held for Armistice Day or Veterans Day. The study further reveals
that a local club organized social events for the community at the cross
from 1950 to 1975 and that after a local veteran passed away in 1984,
the “memory and associations of the white cross . . . as a war memorial”


20

SALAZAR v. BUONO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

This brings us to the final factor identified by the plural­
ity: Congress’ “policy of accommodation” for the cross.10 Of
course, the District Court did consider Congress’ “policy”
in the sense that it considered the result Congress was
trying to achieve with respect to the cross, i.e., to keep it in
place. See Buono III, 364 F. Supp. 2d, at 1182 (“[T]he
proposed transfer of the subject property can only be
viewed as an attempt to keep the Latin cross atop Sunrise
Rock without actually curing the continuing Establish­
ment Clause violation”). But I understand the plurality to
be faulting the District Court for failing to inquire into a
deeper level of motivation: If the purpose of the transfer
was to keep the cross in place, what was the purpose of
keeping the cross in place?
I do not see why it was incumbent upon the District
Court to examine this second-order purpose when deter­
mining whether the transfer violated the 2002 injunction.
As discussed in Part II, supra, the injunction barred the
Government from permitting the display of the cross,
which fairly encompasses any act providing an opportu­
nity for the cross’ display. It was entirely appropriate for
the District Court to characterize a transfer with the
purpose of preserving the cross as an attempt to evade
that injunction, and to find that the Government’s purpose
to preserve the cross maintains government endorsement
of the cross.
——————
faded but locals were “inspired . . . to reinstate the Easter sunrise
services” at the cross. Ibid.
10 Although the plurality uses the term “accommodation,” I do not
read its opinion to suggest that Congress’ policy vis-à-vis the cross has
anything to do with accommodating any individual’s religious practice.
Cf. County of Allegheny, 492 U. S., at 601, n. 51 (“Nor can the display of
the crèche be justified as an ‘accommodation’ of religion. . . . To be sure,
prohibiting the display . . . deprives Christians of the satisfaction of
seeing the government adopt their religious message as their own, but
this kind of government affiliation with particular religious messages is
precisely what the Establishment Clause precludes”).


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

21

STEVENS, J., dissenting

The plurality would have the District Court revise its
entire analysis of whether the transfer would end govern­
ment endorsement, in light of the plurality’s view of the
land-transfer statute’s putative second-order purpose.
That analysis ignores the procedural posture of the case.
If the question before the Court were whether §8121 itself
violated the Establishment Clause, then this argument
might have merit. But we are instead examining whether
action taken with the purpose of preserving the display of
the cross cures or continues government endorsement. In
my view, that purpose continues the impermissible en­
dorsement of—indeed, favoritism toward—the cross,
regardless of why Congress chose to intervene as it did.
In any event, Congress’ second-order purpose does little
for the plurality’s position. Without relying on any legisla­
tive history or findings—there are none—the plurality
opines that Congress wanted to keep the cross in place in
order to accommodate those who might view removal as
“conveying disrespect for those the cross was seen as
honoring,” ante, at 12, and it suggests that this decision
was an acceptable method of “balanc[ing] opposing inter­
ests” because the cross “has complex meaning beyond the
expression of religious views,” ante, at 13. As I have al­
ready explained, the meaning of the cross (complex or
otherwise) is no longer before us, and the plurality’s reli­
ance on a “congressional statement of policy,” ibid., as
negating any government endorsement of religion finds no
support in logic or precedent. The cross cannot take on a
nonsectarian character by congressional (or judicial) fiat,
and the plurality’s evaluation of Congress’ actions is di­
vorced from the methodology prescribed by our doctrine.11
——————
11 JUSTICE ALITO similarly affords great weight to Congress’ purported
interest in “avoiding the disturbing symbolism associated with the
destruction of the historic monument.” Ante, at 5 (opinion concurring
in part and concurring in judgment). But we surely all can agree that
once the government has violated the Establishment Clause, as has


22

SALAZAR v. BUONO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

Our precedent provides that we evaluate purpose based
upon what the objective indicia of intent would reveal to a
reasonable observer. See McCreary County v. American
Civil Liberties Union of Ky., 545 U. S. 844, 862 (2005)
(“The eyes that look to purpose belong to an objective
observer, one who takes account of the traditional external
signs that show up in the text, legislative history, and
implementation of the statute, or comparable official act”
(internal quotation marks omitted)). “[R]easonable ob­
servers have reasonable memories, and our precedents
sensibly forbid an observer ‘to turn a blind eye to the
context in which [the] policy arose.’ ” Id., at 866 (quoting
Santa Fe Independent School Dist. v. Doe, 530 U. S. 290,
315 (2000)). The plurality nowhere engages with how a
reasonable observer would view Congress’ “policy of ac­
commodation” for this cross. Instead, the plurality insists
that deference is owed because of “Congress’s prerogative
to balance opposing interests and its institutional compe­
tence to do so.” Ante, at 13.
The proper remedy for an Establishment Clause viola­
tion is a legal judgment, which is not the sort of issue for
which Congress “ ‘has both wisdom and experience . . . that
——————
been adjudged in this case and is now beyond question, a plaintiff must
be afforded a complete remedy. That remedy may sometimes require
removing a religious symbol, and regrettably some number of people
may perceive the remedy as evidence that the government “is bent on
eliminating from all public places and symbols any trace of our coun­
try’s religious heritage,” ante, at 4. But it does not follow that the
government can decline to cure an Establishment Clause violation in
order to avoid offense. It may be the case that taking down the symbol
is not the only remedy. The proper remedy, like the determination of
the violation itself, is necessarily context specific, and even if it involves
moving the cross, it need not involve the “demolition” or “destruction” of
the cross, see ante, at 4, 5. Regardless, in this case the only question
before us is whether this particular transfer provided a complete
remedy. We have no way of knowing whether Congress’ motivation
was to minimize offense, but in any event that interest does not amelio­
rate the remedial ineffectiveness of §8121.


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

23

STEVENS, J., dissenting

is far superior to ours.’ ” Citizens United v. FEC, 558 U. S.
___, ___ (2010) (STEVENS, J., dissenting) (slip op., at 71)
(quoting Colorado Republican Federal Campaign Comm.
v. FEC, 518 U. S. 604, 650 (1996) (STEVENS, J., dissent­
ing)). Moreover, the inference that Congress has exercised
its institutional competence—or even its considered judg­
ment—is significantly weaker in a case such as this, when
the legislative action was “buried in a defense appropria­
tions bill,” Buono III, 364 F. Supp. 2d, at 1181, and, so far
as the record shows, undertaken without any deliberation
whatsoever. I am not dismissive of Congress, see ante, at
7 (opinion of ALITO, J.), but §8121 presents no factual
findings, reasoning, or long history of “ ‘careful legislative
adjustment,’ ” Citizens United, 558 U. S., at ___ (STEVENS,
J., dissenting) (slip op., at 71) (quoting FEC v. Beaumont,
539 U. S. 146, 162, n. 9 (2003)), to which I could possibly
defer. Congress did not devote “years of careful study” to
§8121, Citizens United, 558 U. S., at ___ (STEVENS, J.,
dissenting) (slip op., at 73), nor did it develop a record of
any kind, much less an exhaustive one, see id., at ___ (slip
op., at 20) (noting the legislative record for the Bipartisan
Campaign Reform Act of 2002 spanned 100,000 pages).
The concurrence’s attempt to draw an equivalence be­
tween a provision tucked silently into an appropriations
bill and a major statute debated and developed over many
years is, to say the least, not persuasive. All legislative
acts are not fungible.
Furthermore, in the Establishment Clause context, we
do not accord any special deference to the legislature on
account of its generic advantages as a policymaking body,
and the purpose test is not “satisfied so long as any secu­
lar purpose for the government action is apparent,”
McCreary County, 545 U. S., at 865, n. 13 (emphasis
added). Nor can the Government pursue a secular aim
through religious means. See Van Orden, 545 U. S., at
715 (STEVENS, J., dissenting) (“Though the State of Texas


24

SALAZAR v. BUONO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

may genuinely wish to combat juvenile delinquency, and
may rightly want to honor the Eagles for their efforts, it
cannot effectuate these admirable purposes through an
explicitly religious medium”). It is odd that the plurality
ignores all of these well-settled principles in exalting this
particular legislative determination.
A reasonable observer, considering the nature of this
symbol, the timing and the substance of Congress’ efforts,
and the history of the Sunrise Rock site, could conclude
that Congress chose to preserve the cross primarily be­
cause of its salience as a cross. Cf. McCreary County, 545
U. S., at 873 (“If the observer had not thrown up his
hands, he would probably suspect that the Counties were
simply reaching for any way to keep a religious document
on the walls . . .”). But no such conclusion is necessary to
find for respondent.12 The religious meaning of the cross
was settled by the 2002 judgment; the only question before
us is whether the Government has sufficiently distanced
itself from the cross to end government endorsement of it.
At the least, I stress again, a reasonable observer would
conclude that the Government’s purpose in transferring
the underlying land did not sufficiently distance the Gov­
ernment from the cross. Indeed, §8121 evidenced concern
for whether the cross would be displayed. The District
Court was therefore correct to find that the transfer would
——————
12 I have not “jump[ed] to the conclusion that Congress’ aim in enact­
ing the land transfer law was to embrace the religious message of the
cross.” Ante, at 7 (opinion of ALITO, J.). I think a reasonable observer
could come to that conclusion, but my point is that so long as we agree
that Congress’ aim was to preserve the cross (which JUSTICE ALITO does
not dispute), Congress’ reason for preserving the cross does not matter.
But if we were debating whether Congress had a religious purpose in
passing the transfer statute, I would contest the relevance of the vote
count to that inquiry, see ante, at 6, and particularly so in this case.
One cannot infer much of anything about the land-transfer provision
from the fact that an appropriations bill passed by an overwhelming
majority.


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

25

STEVENS, J., dissenting

not end government endorsement of religion.
IV
In sum, I conclude that the transfer ordered by §8121
will not end the pre-existing government endorsement of
the cross, and to the contrary may accentuate the problem
in some respects. Because the transfer would perpetuate
the Establishment Clause violation at issue in the 2002
injunction, I further conclude that enjoining the transfer
was necessary to secure relief. Given the transfer stat­
ute’s fundamental inadequacy as a remedy, there was—
and is—no need for the District Court to consider “less
drastic relief than complete invalidation of the . . . stat­
ute.” Ante, at 18. Allowing the transfer to go forward
would interfere with the District Court’s authority to
enforce its judgment and deprive the District Court of the
ability to ensure a complete remedy. Nor could allowing
the transfer to go forward be made a complete remedy
with add-on measures, such as signs or fences indicating
the ownership of the land. Such measures would not
completely end the government endorsement of this cross,
as the land would have been transferred in a manner
favoring the cross and the cross would remain designated
as a national memorial. Enjoining compliance with §8121
was therefore a proper exercise of the District Court’s
authority to enforce the 2002 judgment.
*
*
*
Congressional action, taken after due deliberation, that
honors our fallen soldiers merits our highest respect. As
far as I can tell, however, it is unprecedented in the Na­
tion’s history to designate a bare, unadorned cross as the
national war memorial for a particular group of veterans.
Neither the Korean War Memorial, the Vietnam War
Memorial, nor the World War II Memorial commemorates
our veterans’ sacrifice in sectarian or predominantly reli­
gious ways. Each of these impressive structures pays


26

SALAZAR v. BUONO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

equal respect to all members of the Armed Forces who
perished in the service of our Country in those conflicts.
In this case, by contrast, a sectarian symbol is the memo­
rial. And because Congress has established no other
national monument to the veterans of the Great War, this
solitary cross in the middle of the desert is the national
World War I memorial. The sequence of legislative deci­
sions made to designate and preserve a solitary Latin
cross at an isolated location in the desert as a memorial
for those who fought and died in World War I not only
failed to cure the Establishment Clause violation but also,
in my view, resulted in a dramatically inadequate and
inappropriate tribute.
I believe that most judges would find it to be a clear
Establishment Clause violation if Congress had simply
directed that a solitary Latin cross be erected on the Mall
in the Nation’s Capital to serve as a World War I Memo­
rial. Congress did not erect this cross, but it commanded
that the cross remain in place, and it gave the cross the
imprimatur of Government. Transferring the land pursu­
ant to §8121 would perpetuate rather than cure that
unambiguous endorsement of a sectarian message.
The Mojave Desert is a remote location, far from the
seat of our Government. But the Government’s interest in
honoring all those who have rendered heroic public service
regardless of creed, as well as its constitutional responsi­
bility to avoid endorsement of a particular religious view,
should control wherever national memorials speak on
behalf of our entire country.
I respectfully dissent.

