Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
that define void judgments qualifying for Rule 60(b)(4) relief. Section
523(a)(8) does not limit a bankruptcy court’s jurisdiction over student
loan debts or impose requirements that, if violated, would result in a
denial of due process. Instead, it requires a court to make a certain
findings before confirming a student loan debt’s discharge. ‘That this
requirement is “ ‘self-executing,’ ” Tennessee Student Assistance Cor
poration v. Hood, 541 U. S. 440, 450, means only that the bankruptcy
court must make an undue hardship finding even if the creditor does
not request one; it does not mean that a bankruptcy court’s failure to
make the finding renders its subsequent confirmation order void for
Rule 60(b)(4) purposes. Although the Bankruptcy Court’s failure to
find undue hardship was a legal error, the confirmation order is en
forceable and binding on United because it had actual notice of the
error and failed to object or timely appeal. Pp. 10–14.
2. The Ninth Circuit erred in holding that bankruptcy courts must
confirm a plan proposing the discharge of a student loan debt without
an undue hardship determination in an adversary proceeding unless
the creditor timely raises a specific objection. A Chapter 13 plan pro
posing such a discharge without the required determination violates
§§1328(a)(2) and 523(a)(8). Failure to comply with this self-executing
requirement should prevent confirmation even if the creditor fails to
object, or to appear in the proceeding at all, since a bankruptcy court
may confirm only a plan that, inter alia, complies with the “applica
ble provisions” of the Code. §1325(a). Neither the Code nor the Rules
prevent parties from stipulating to the underlying facts of undue
hardship or prevent the creditor from waiving service of a summons
and complaint. Pp. 14–16.
3. Expanding the availability of Rule 60(b)(4) relief is not an ap
propriate prophylaxis for discouraging unscrupulous debtors from fil
ing Chapter 13 plans proposing to dispense with the undue hardship
requirement in hopes that the bankruptcy court will overlook the
proposal and the creditor will not object. Such bad-faith efforts
should be deterred by the specter of penalties that “[d]ebtors and
their attorneys face . . . under various provisions for engaging in im
proper conduct in bankruptcy proceedings,” Taylor v. Freeland &
Kronz, 503 U. S. 638, 644. And Congress may enact additional provi
sions to address any difficulties should existing sanctions prove in
adequate. Pp. 16–17.
553 F. 3d 1193, affirmed.
THOMAS, J., delivered the opinion for a unanimous Court.

