(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

UNITED STUDENT AID FUNDS, INC. v. ESPINOSA
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–1134. Argued December 1, 2009—Decided March 23, 2010
A plan proposed under Bankruptcy Code (Code) Chapter 13 becomes
effective upon confirmation, see 11 U. S. C. §§1324, 1325, and will re
sult in a discharge of the debts listed in the plan if the debtor com
pletes the payments the plan requires, see §1328(a). A debtor may
obtain a discharge of government-sponsored student loan debts only
if failure to discharge that debt would impose an “undue hardship” on
the debtor and his dependents. §§523(a)(8); 1328. Bankruptcy courts
must make this undue hardship determination in an adversary pro
ceeding, see Fed. Rule Bkrtcy. Proc. 7001(6), which the party seeking
the determination must initiate by serving a summons and complaint
on his adversary, see Rules 7003, 7004, 7008. Respondent Espinosa’s
plan proposed repaying the principal on his student loan debt and
discharging the interest once the principal was repaid, but he did not
initiate the required adversary proceeding. The student loan credi
tor, petitioner United, received notice of the plan from the Bank
ruptcy Court and did not object to the plan or to Espinosa’s failure to
initiate the required proceeding. The Bankruptcy Court confirmed
the plan without holding such a proceeding or making a finding of
undue hardship. Once Espinosa paid his student loan principal, the
court discharged the interest. A few years later, the Department of
Education sought to collect that interest. In response, Espinosa
asked the court to enforce the confirmation order by directing the
Department and United to cease any collection efforts. United op
posed the motion and filed a cross-motion under Federal Rule of Civil
Procedure 60(b)(4), seeking to set aside as void the confirmation or
der because the plan provision authorizing discharge of Espinosa’s
student loan interest was inconsistent with the Code and the Bank
ruptcy Rules, and because United’s due process rights were violated

