Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of the Court

the plan stated: “WARNING IF YOU ARE A CREDITOR
YOUR RIGHTS MAY BE IMPAIRED BY THIS PLAN.”
Id., at 23. The plan also noted the deadlines for filing a
proof of claim or an objection to the plan. Id., at 26–27.
United received this notice and, in response, filed a
proof of claim for $17,832.15, an amount representing both
the principal and the accrued interest on Espinosa’s stu­
dent loans. Id., at 35. United did not object to the plan’s
proposed discharge of Espinosa’s student loan interest
without a determination of undue hardship, nor did it
object to Espinosa’s failure to initiate an adversary pro­
ceeding to determine the dischargeability of that debt.
In May 1993, the Bankruptcy Court confirmed
Espinosa’s plan without holding an adversary proceeding
or making a finding of undue hardship. One month later,
the Chapter 13 trustee mailed United a form notice stat­
ing that “[t]he amount of the claim filed differs from the
amount listed for payment in the plan” and that “[y]our
claim will be paid as listed in the plan.” Id., at 44. The
form also apprised United that if United “wishe[d] to
dispute the above stated treatment of the claim,” it had
the “responsibility” to notify the trustee within 30 days.
Ibid. United did not respond to that notice.
In May 1997, Espinosa completed the payments on his
student loan principal, as required by the plan. Shortly
thereafter, the Bankruptcy Court discharged Espinosa’s
student loan interest.2
In 2000, the United States Department of Education
commenced efforts to collect the unpaid interest on Espi­
nosa’s student loans.3 In response, Espinosa filed a mo­
——————
2 The discharge order contained an apparent clerical error that the
courts below considered and addressed in adjudicating these proceed­
ings. See n. 4, infra.
3 After Espinosa completed payments under the plan, United as­
signed Espinosa’s loans to the Department under a reinsurance agree­
ment. After these proceedings began, United requested and received a

