16

UNITED STUDENT AID FUNDS, INC. v. ESPINOSA
Opinion of the Court

plan to the requirements of §§1328(a)(2) and 523(a)(8).15
We are mindful that conserving assets is an important
concern in a bankruptcy proceeding. We thus assume
that, in some cases, a debtor and creditor may agree that
payment of a student loan debt will cause the debtor an
undue hardship sufficient to justify discharge. In such a
case, there is no reason that compliance with the undue
hardship requirement should impose significant costs on
the parties or materially delay confirmation of the plan.
Neither the Code nor the Rules prevent the parties from
stipulating to the underlying facts of undue hardship, and
neither prevents the creditor from waiving service of a
summons and complaint. See Fed. Rule Bkrtcy. Proc.
7004; Fed. Rule Civ. Proc. 4(k). But, to comply with
§523(a)(8)’s directive, the bankruptcy court must make an
independent determination of undue hardship before a
plan is confirmed, even if the creditor fails to object or
appear in the adversary proceeding. See supra, at 12.
IV
United argues that our failure to declare the Bank­
ruptcy Court’s order void will encourage unscrupulous
debtors to abuse the Chapter 13 process by filing plans
proposing to dispense with the undue hardship require­
ment in the hopes the bankruptcy court will overlook the
proposal and the creditor will not object. In the event the
objectionable provision is discovered, United claims, the
debtor can withdraw the plan and file another without
penalty.
We acknowledge the potential for bad-faith litigation
tactics. But expanding the availability of relief under Rule
——————
15 Bankruptcy courts appear to be well aware of this statutory obliga­
tion. See, e.g., In re Mammel, 221 B. R. 238, 239 (Bkrtcy. Ct. ND Iowa
1998) (“[W]hether or not an objection is presently lodged in this case,
the Court retains the authority to review this plan and deny confirma­
tion if it fails to comply with the confirmation standards of the Code”).

