2

UNITED STUDENT AID FUNDS, INC. v. ESPINOSA
Syllabus
when Espinosa failed to serve it with the required summons and
complaint.
Rejecting those arguments, the Bankruptcy Court
granted Espinosa’s motion in relevant part and denied the cross
motion. The District Court reversed, holding that United was denied
due process when the confirmation order was issued without the re
quired service. The Ninth Circuit ultimately reversed. It concluded
that by confirming Espinosa’s plan without first finding undue hard
ship in an adversary proceeding, the Bankruptcy Court at most
committed a legal error that United might have successfully ap
pealed, but that such error was no basis for setting aside the order as
void under Rule 60(b)(4). It also held that Espinosa’s failure to serve
United was not a basis upon which to declare the judgment void be
cause United received actual notice of the plan and failed to object.

Held:
1. The Bankruptcy Court’s confirmation order is not void under
Rule 60(b)(4). Pp. 6–14.
(a) That order was a final judgment from which United did not
appeal. Such finality ordinarily would “stan[d] in the way of chal
lenging [the order’s] enforceability,” Travelers Indemnity Co. v. Bai
ley, 557 U. S. ___, ___. However, Rule 60(b)(4) allows a party to seek
relief from a final judgment that “is void,” but only in the rare in
stance where a judgment is premised either on a certain type of ju
risdictional error or on a violation of due process that deprives a
party of notice or the opportunity to be heard. United’s alleged error
falls in neither category. Conceding that the Bankruptcy Court had
jurisdiction to enter the confirmation order, United contends that the
judgment is void because United did not receive adequate notice of
Espinosa’s proposed discharge. Espinosa’s failure to serve the sum
mons and complaint as required by the Bankruptcy Rules deprived
United of a right granted by a procedural rule. United could have
timely objected to this deprivation and appealed from an adverse rul
ing on its objection. But this deprivation did not amount to a viola
tion of due process, which requires notice “reasonably calculated, un
der all the circumstances, to apprise interested parties of the
pendency of the action and afford them an opportunity to present
their objections,” Mullane v. Central Hanover Bank & Trust Co., 339
U. S. 306, 314. Here, United’s actual notice of the filing and contents
of Espinosa’s plan more than satisfied its due process rights. Thus,
Espinosa’s failure to make the required service does not entitle
United to relief under Rule 60(b)(4). Pp. 7–10.
(b) Contrary to United’s claim, the confirmation order is not void
because the Bankruptcy Court lacked statutory authority to confirm
Espinosa’s plan absent an undue hardship finding under §523(a)(8).
Such failure is not on par with the jurisdictional and notice failings

