Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

1

GINSBURG, J., concurring

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 10–1018
_________________

STEVE A. FILARSKY, PETITIONER v. NICHOLAS B.

DELIA

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT

[April 17, 2012] 


JUSTICE GINSBURG, concurring.
The Court addresses a sole question in this case: Is a
private attorney retained by a municipality to investigate
a personnel matter eligible for qualified immunity in a
suit under 42 U. S. C. §1983 alleging a constitutional
violation committed in the course of the investigation? I
agree that the answer is yes and that the judgment of
the Court of Appeals holding private attorney Filarsky
categorically ineligible for qualified immunity must be reversed. Qualified immunity may be overcome, however, if
the defendant knew or should have known that his conduct violated a right “clearly established” at the time of
the episode in suit. See Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 U. S.
800, 818 (1982). Because the Ninth Circuit did not consider the application of that standard to Filarsky, the
matter, as I see it, may be pursued on remand.
Filarsky was retained by the City of Rialto to investigate whether city firefighter Delia was taking time off
from work under the false pretense of a disabling physical
condition. In pursuit of the investigation, Filarsky asked
Delia to consent to a search of his home to determine what
Delia had done with several rolls of insulation he had
recently purchased at a home improvement store. When
Delia, on counsel’s advice, refused to consent to the search,
Filarsky “hatch[ed] a plan” to overcome Delia’s resistance.


2

FILARSKY v. DELIA
GINSBURG, J., concurring

Delia v. Rialto, 621 F. 3d 1069, 1077 (CA9 2010). “[W]e
will do it a different way,” Filarsky informed Delia. App.
129; see 621 F. 3d, at 1077 (“Unable to obtain Delia’s
consent to a warrantless search of his house . . . , Filarsky
tried a different tactic.”).
Following Filarsky’s advice, Fire Chief Wells ordered
Delia to bring the insulation out of his house and place the
rolls on his lawn for inspection. App. 158. Filarsky recommended this course, the Ninth Circuit observed, mindful that “an individual does not have an expectation of
privacy in items exposed to the public, thereby eliminating
the need for a search warrant.” 621 F. 3d, at 1077. Delia
complied with Chief Wells’s order by producing the rolls,
all of them unused, App. 78, 85, after which the investigation into the legitimacy of Delia’s absence from work
apparently ended.
In explaining why the individual defendants other than
Filarsky were entitled to summary judgment on their
qualified immunity pleas, the Ninth Circuit stated that
“no . . . threat to [Delia’s] employment” attended Fire
Chief Wells’s order. 621 F. 3d, at 1079. The District
Court similarly stated that “Delia was not threatened with
insubordination or termination if he did not comply with
[the] order.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 48.
These statements are at odds with the facts, as recounted by the Court of Appeals. “At the onset of the interview,” the Ninth Circuit stressed, “Filarsky warned Delia
that he was obligated to fully cooperate,” and that “[i]f at
any time it is deemed you are not cooperating then you
can be held to be insubordinate and subject to disciplinary
action, up to and including termination.” 621 F. 3d, at
1072 (internal quotation marks omitted). Continuing in
this vein, the Court of Appeals concluded that “Delia’s
actions were involuntary and coerced by the direct threat
of sanctions including loss of his firefighter position.” Id.,
at 1077; see id., at 1085 (“Delia’s actions were involun-


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

GINSBURG, J., concurring

tary and occurred as a result of the direct threat of
sanctions[.]”).
In further proceedings upon return of this case to the
Court of Appeals, these questions bear attention. First, if
it is “clearly established,” as the Ninth Circuit thought it
was, that “the warrantless search of a home is presumptively unreasonable,” id., at 1075, and that a well-trained
investigating officer would so comprehend,1 may an official
circumvent the warrant requirement by ordering the person under investigation to cart his personal property out
of the house for inspection?2 And if it is “clearly established” that an employee may not be fired for exercising a
constitutional right, see id., at 1079,3 is it not equally
plain that discipline or discharge may not be threatened to
induce surrender of such a right?
In short, the Court has responded appropriately to the
question tendered for our review, but the Circuit’s law will
remain muddled absent the Court of Appeals’ focused
attention to the question whether Filarsky’s conduct
violated “clearly established” law.
——————
1 Delia also suggests that Filarsky’s conduct should be measured
against a “reasonable attorney” standard: whether an attorney providing advice in a public-employee investigation should have known that
the search of Delia’s personal property, stored in his home, would be
lawless. See Brief for Respondent 45–46.
2 An additional inquiry may be appropriate: Although conceived as a
substitute for a warrantless entry, should the inspection order Filarsky
counseled pass muster as a permissible discovery device? Cf. Oklahoma Press Publishing Co. v. Walling, 327 U. S. 186, 195, 208–211 (1946)
(subpoena duces tecum for a corporation’s business records, authorized
by §9 of the Fair Labor Standards Act, encountered no Fourth Amendment shoal).
3 The Ninth Circuit referred to cases holding that public employees’
job retention cannot be conditioned on relinquishing the Fifth Amendment’s safeguard against self-incrimination: Uniformed Sanitation Men
Assn., Inc. v. Commissioner of Sanitation of City of New York, 392 U. S.
280 (1968), and Gardner v. Broderick, 392 U. S. 273 (1968).

