Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

1

Opinion of the Court
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 10–7387
_________________

MONROE ACE SETSER, PETITIONER v. UNITED

STATES 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF

APPEALS FOR THE FIFTH CIRCUIT

[March 28, 2012]


JUSTICE SCALIA delivered the opinion of the Court.
We consider whether a district court, in sentencing a defendant for a federal offense, has authority to order that
the federal sentence be consecutive to an anticipated state
sentence that has not yet been imposed.
I
When officers of the Lubbock Police Department arrested petitioner Monroe Setser for possessing methamphetamine, he was already serving a 5-year term of probation imposed by a Texas court for another drug offense.
Setser was indicted in state court for possession with intent
to deliver a controlled substance, and the State also moved
to revoke his term of probation. As often happens in drug
cases, the federal authorities also got involved. A federal
grand jury indicted Setser for possessing with intent to
distribute 50 grams or more of methamphetamine, 21
U. S. C. §841(a)(1), (b)(1)(A)(viii), and he pleaded guilty.
Before the federal sentencing hearing, a probation officer calculated the applicable Guidelines range to be 121
to 151 months’ imprisonment. Citing precedent from
the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit,


2

SETSER v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

United States v. Brown, 920 F. 2d 1212 (1991) (per curiam),
he indicated that the District Court had discretion to make
Setser’s sentence either concurrent with or consecutive to
any sentence anticipated in the separate state-court proceedings. Setser objected, arguing that the District Court
lacked such authority. The court nevertheless made the
sentence of 151 months that it imposed consecutive to any
state sentence imposed for probation violation, but concurrent with any state sentence imposed on the new drug
charge. Setser appealed.
While Setser’s appeal was pending, the state court
sentenced him to a prison term of 5 years for probation
violation and 10 years on the new drug charge. It ordered
that these sentences be served concurrently. Setser then
made before the Court of Appeals, in addition to the argument that the District Court had no authority to order a
consecutive sentence, the argument that his federal sentence was unreasonable because it was impossible to
implement in light of the concurrent state sentences.
The Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit affirmed. 607
F. 3d 128 (2010). Following its earlier Brown decision, the
court held that the District Court did have authority to
order a consecutive sentence. 607 F. 3d, at 131–132. It
also held that Setser’s sentence was reasonable, even if it
was “ ‘partially foiled’ ” by the state court’s decision. Id., at
132–133. We granted certiorari, 564 U. S. ___ (2011), and
appointed an amicus curiae to brief and argue this case in
support of the judgment below, 564 U. S. ___ (2011).
II
Before proceeding further, it is important to be clear
about what is at issue. Setser does not contend that his
federal sentence must run concurrently with both state
sentences imposed after his federal sentencing hearing.
He acknowledges that someone must answer “the consecutive versus concurrent question,” Brief for Petitioner 27,


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of the Court

and decide how the state and federal sentences will fit
together. The issue here is who will make that decision,
which in turn determines when that decision is made.
One possible answer, and the one the Fifth Circuit gave, is
that the decision belongs to the Federal District Court at
the federal sentencing hearing.
The concurrent-vs.-consecutive decision has been addressed by §212(a) of the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984,
18 U. S. C. §3584, reproduced in full as Appendix A, infra.
The first subsection of that provision, which says when
concurrent and consecutive sentences may be imposed,
and specifies which of those dispositions will be assumed
in absence of indication by the sentencing judge, does not
cover the situation here. It addresses only “multiple terms
of imprisonment . . . imposed . . . at the same time” and “a
term of imprisonment . . . imposed on a defendant who is
already subject to an undischarged term of imprisonment.”
§3584(a). Here the state sentence is not imposed at the
same time as the federal sentence, and the defendant was
not already subject to that state sentence.
Setser, supported by the Government, argues that, because §3584(a) does not cover this situation, the District
Court lacked authority to act as it did; and that the
concurrent-vs.-consecutive decision is therefore to be made
by the Bureau of Prisons at any time after the federal sentence has been imposed. The Bureau of Prisons is said to
derive this authority from 18 U. S. C. §3621(b) (2006 ed.
and Supp. IV), reproduced in full as Appendix B, infra.
On its face, this provision says nothing about concurrent
or consecutive sentences, but the Government explains its
position as follows: Section 3621(b) gives the Bureau the
authority to order that a prisoner serve his federal sentence in any suitable prison facility “whether maintained
by the Federal Government or otherwise.” The Bureau
may therefore order that a prisoner serve his federal
sentence in a state prison. Thus, when a person subject to


4

SETSER v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

a federal sentence is serving a state sentence, the Bureau
may designate the state prison as the place of imprisonment for the federal sentence—effectively making the
two sentences concurrent—or decline to do so—effectively making them consecutive.1 Based on §§3584(a)
and 3621(b), Setser and the Government argue that the
concurrent-vs.-consecutive decision, under the circumstances presented here, is committed exclusively to the
Bureau of Prisons.
It is fundamental that we construe statutes governing
the jurisdiction of the federal courts in light of “the
common-law background against which the statutes . . .
were enacted,” New Orleans Public Service, Inc. v. Council
of City of New Orleans, 491 U. S. 350, 359 (1989), and the
same approach is appropriate here, where the issue concerns a matter of discretion traditionally committed to the
Judiciary. Judges have long been understood to have
discretion to select whether the sentences they impose will
run concurrently or consecutively with respect to other
sentences that they impose, or that have been imposed in
other proceedings, including state proceedings. See Oregon v. Ice, 555 U. S. 160, 168–169 (2009). And a large
majority of the federal appellate courts addressing the
question have recognized a similar authority in the context here, where a federal judge anticipates a state sentence that has not yet been imposed. See Salley v. United
States, 786 F. 2d 546, 547 (CA2 1986); Anderson v. United
States, 405 F. 2d 492, 493 (CA10 1969) (per curiam); United
States ex rel. Lester v. Parker, 404 F. 2d 40, 41–42 (CA3
1968) (per curiam); United States v. Kanton, 362 F. 2d 178,
179–180 (CA7 1966) (per curiam); but see United States v.
——————
1 The Bureau of Prisons sometimes makes this designation while the
prisoner is in state custody and sometimes makes a nunc pro tunc
designation once the prisoner enters federal custody.


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

Opinion of the Court

Eastman, 758 F. 2d 1315, 1317 (CA9 1985)2. We find
nothing in the Sentencing Reform Act, or in any other
provision of law, to show that Congress foreclosed the
exercise of district courts’ sentencing discretion in these
circumstances.
Setser’s main contention is that §3584(a) has this effect.
But that provision cannot sustain the weight that Setser
asks it to bear. In essence, he reads the first sentence in
§3584(a) to say that “terms [of imprisonment] may run
concurrently or consecutively” only “[i]f multiple terms of
imprisonment are imposed . . . at the same time, or if a
term of imprisonment is imposed on a defendant who is
——————
2 The

dissent is incorrect to say, post, at 7–8 (opinion of BREYER, J.),
that only the Second Circuit, in Salley held to that effect. So did the
Seventh Circuit in Kanton and the Tenth Circuit in Anderson. The
dissent says that Anderson addressed only the question “whether a
federal sentence runs from the date of its imposition or from the date of
entry into federal custody,” post, at 7–8. That is true enough (and it is
true of Kanton as well); but answering that question in a manner that
upheld the consecutive federal sentence (i.e., it runs from the date of
entry into federal custody) necessarily upheld the sentencing court’s
authority to impose the consecutive federal sentence. In fact, Anderson confronted and specifically rejected the defendant’s argument that
“ ‘[n]o court has the authority to impose a sentence consecutive to
something that does not exist,’ ” 405 F. 2d, at 493. And, finally, so did
the Third Circuit in Lester. The dissent says that Lester addressed only
the question “whether a sentence was insufficiently certain for purposes of due process,” post, at 8. But that was the defendant’s principal reason (as it appears also to be the dissent’s principal reason) for
asserting that the sentencing court had no authority to impose a
consecutive sentence. And the Third Circuit rejected not only that
reason but “[o]ther arguments advanced by [the defendant] ” attacking
the consecutive sentence, 404 F. 2d, at 42.
The only contrary federal appellate decision rendered before the Sentencing Reform Act took effect relied upon 18 U. S. C. §4082 (1982 ed.)
(the predecessor of §3621) and §3568 (1982 ed.) (repealed by 98 Stat.
1987), which provided that a federal sentence “shall commence to run
from the date on which such person is received” into federal custody.
See United States v. Eastman, 758 F. 2d 1315, 1317 (CA9 1985).


6

SETSER v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

already subject to an undischarged term of imprisonment.”
Since the District Court was not imposing the state sentence and since it was not already imposed, the sentence
could not be ordered to run consecutively. But if the text
is exclusive—if the addition of only is correct—the provision forbids not only the imposition of consecutive sentences, but the imposition of concurrent ones as well. And
yet, as Setser acknowledges, it must be one or the other;
someone must decide the issue.
Setser’s response is that, read in context, the sentence
speaks only to district courts. Under the circumstances at
issue here, he says, the federal and state sentences still
might run either concurrently or consecutively, but just
not at the discretion of the District Court. That is an odd
parsing of the text, which makes no distinction between
the district court and the Bureau of Prisons. The placement of §3584 does indeed suggest that it is directed at
district courts—but that is likely because Congress contemplated that only district courts would have the authority to make the concurrent-vs.-consecutive decision, not
because Congress meant to leave the Bureau unfettered.
Indeed, the Bureau already follows the other directives in
§3584(a). See Brief for United States 35. For example, if
the district court imposes multiple terms of imprisonment
at the same time, but fails to address the concurrent-vs.consecutive issue, the terms “run concurrently,” §3584(a),
and the Bureau is not free to use its “place of imprisonment” authority to achieve a different result.3
The Latin maxim on which Setser relies—expressio
——————
3 The Government contends that the Bureau applies the default rules
in §3584(a) “[a]s a matter of discretion” but is not “ ‘bound’ ” by that
subsection. Reply Brief for United States 15, n. 5. We think it implausible that the effectiveness of those rules—of §3584(a)’s prescription, for
example, that “[m]ultiple terms of imprisonment imposed at different
times run consecutively unless the court orders that the terms are to
run concurrently”—depends upon the “discretion” of the Bureau.


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

unius est exclusio alterius—might have application here if
the provision in question were a conferral of authority on
district courts. Giving sentencing authority in only specified circumstances could be said to imply that it is withheld in other circumstances. Section 3584, however, is
framed not as a conferral of authority but as a limitation
of authority that already exists (and a specification of
what will be assumed when the exercise of that authority
is ambiguous). It reads not “District courts shall have
authority to impose multiple terms of imprisonment on a
defendant at the same time, etc.” but rather “If multiple
terms of imprisonment are imposed on a defendant at
the same time, [etc.]”—quite clearly assuming that such authority already exists. The mere acknowledgment of the
existence of certain pre-existing authority (and regulation
of that authority) in no way implies a repeal of other preexisting authority. And that is especially true when there
is an obvious reason for selecting the instances of preexisting authority that are addressed—to wit, that they
are the examples of sentencing discretion most frequently
encountered.
Moreover, expressio unius est exclusio alterius is a
double-edged sword. Setser thinks it suggests that, because
§3584(a) recognizes judicial discretion in scenario A and
scenario B, there is no such discretion in scenario C. But
the same maxim shows much more convincingly why
§3621(b) cannot be read to give the Bureau of Prisons
exclusive authority to make the sort of decision committed
to the district court in §3584(a). When §3584(a) specifically addresses decisions about concurrent and consecutive
sentences, and makes no mention of the Bureau’s role in
the process, the implication is that no such role exists.
And that conclusion is reinforced by application of the
same maxim (properly, in this instance) to §3621(b)—
which is a conferral of authority on the Bureau of Prisons,
but does not confer authority to choose between concur-


8

SETSER v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

rent and consecutive sentences. Put to the choice, we
believe it is much more natural to read §3584(a) as not
containing an implied “only,” leaving room for the exercise
of judicial discretion in the situations not covered, than it
is to read §3621(b) as giving the Bureau of Prisons what
amounts to sentencing authority.
III
None of the other objections to this approach raised by
Setser and the Government require a different result.
Our decision today follows the interpretive rule they
invoke, that we must “give effect . . . to every clause and
word” of the Act. United States v. Menasche, 348 U. S.
528, 538–539 (1955) (internal quotation marks omitted).
The first sentence in §3584(a) addresses the most common
situations in which the decision between concurrent and
consecutive sentences must be made: where two sentences
are imposed at the same time, and where a sentence is
imposed subsequent to a prior sentence that has not yet
been fully served. It says that the district court has discretion whether to make the sentences concurrent or
consecutive, except that it may not make consecutive a
sentence for “an attempt” and a sentence for an “offense
that was the sole objective of the attempt.” And the last
two sentences of §3584(a) say what will be assumed in
those two common situations if the court does not specify
that the sentence is concurrent or consecutive. Giving
those dispositions full effect does not demand that we
regard them as eliminating sentencing discretion in other
situations.
Setser and the Government both suggest that, because
§3584(b) directs courts to consider the sentencing factors
in §3553(a) in making these decisions, and because some
of those factors will be difficult to apply with respect to
anticipated sentences, the Act cannot be read to allow
judicial discretion in these circumstances. One cannot be


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of the Court

sure that the sentence imposed is “sufficient, but not
greater than necessary,” §3553(a), the argument goes, if
one does not know how long it will actually be. But the
district judge faces the same uncertainty if the concurrentvs.-consecutive decision is left for later resolution by the
Bureau of Prisons; he does not know, for example, whether
the 5-year sentence he imposes will be an actual five years
or will be simply swallowed within another sentence. To
be sure, the Bureau of Prisons, if it waits to decide the
matter until after the state court has imposed its sentence,
will know for sure what sentences it is dealing with. But
the Bureau is not charged with applying §3553(a). The
factors that guide the agency’s “place of imprisonment”
decision do include “the nature and circumstances of the
offense” and “the history and characteristics of the prisoner,” §3621(b)(2), (b)(3) (2006 ed.)—factors that are, to be
sure, relevant to sentencing but also relevant to selection
of the place of confinement; but they also include factors
that make little, if any, sense in the sentencing context,
such as “the resources of the facility contemplated” and
whether the state facility “meets minimum standards of
health and habitability,” §3621(b), (b)(1). (These factors
confirm our view that §3621 is not a sentencing provision
but a place-of-confinement provision.) It is much more
natural for a judge to apply the §3553(a) factors in making
all concurrent-vs.-consecutive decisions, than it is for some
such decisions to be made by a judge applying §3553(a)
factors and others by the Bureau of Prisons applying
§3621(b) factors.
The final objection is that principles of federalism and
good policy do not allow a district court to make the
concurrent-vs.-consecutive decision when it does not have
before it all of the information about the anticipated state
sentence. As for principles of federalism, it seems to us
they cut in precisely the opposite direction. In our American system of dual sovereignty, each sovereign—whether


10

SETSER v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

the Federal Government or a State—is responsible for “the
administration of [its own] criminal justice syste[m].” Ice,
555 U. S., at 170. If a prisoner like Setser starts in state
custody, serves his state sentence, and then moves to
federal custody, it will always be the Federal Government—whether the district court or the Bureau of Prisons—that decides whether he will receive credit for the
time served in state custody. And if he serves his federal
sentence first, the State will decide whether to give him
credit against his state sentences without being bound by
what the district court or the Bureau said on the matter.
Given this framework, it is always more respectful of the
State’s sovereignty for the district court to make its decision up front rather than for the Bureau of Prisons to
make the decision after the state court has acted. That
way, the state court has all of the information before it
when it acts.4 The Government’s position does not promote the States’ interest—just the interests of the Bureau
of Prisons.
As for good policy: The basic claim of Setser, the Government, and the dissent is that when it comes to sentencing, later is always better because the decisionmaker has
more information. See, e.g., post, at 7 (“[A] sentencing
judge typically needs detailed information when constructing a multiple-count or multiple-conviction Guideline
sentence”). That is undoubtedly true, but when that
desideratum is applied to the statutory structure before us
——————
4 Setser notes that the text of §3584(a) does not distinguish between
state and federal sentences. If a district court can enter a consecutive
sentencing order in advance of an anticipated state sentence, he asks,
what is to stop it from issuing such an order in advance of an anticipated federal sentence? It could be argued that §3584(a) impliedly
prohibits such an order because it gives that decision to the federal
court that sentences the defendant when the other sentence is “already”
imposed—and does not speak (of course) to what a state court must do
when a sentence has already been imposed. It suffices to say, however,
that this question is not before us.


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

Opinion of the Court

here it is overwhelmed by text, by our tradition of judicial
sentencing,5 and by the accompanying desideratum that
sentencing not be left to employees of the same Department of Justice that conducts the prosecution.6 Moreover,
when the district court’s failure to “anticipat[e] developments that take place after the first sentencing,” Brief
for United States 29, produces unfairness to the defendant, the Act provides a mechanism for relief. Section
3582(c)(1)(A) provides that a district court,
“upon motion of the Director of the Bureau of Prisons,
may reduce the term of imprisonment . . . after con——————
5 To support its view that Congress authorized the Bureau to make
concurrent-vs.-consecutive decisions, the dissent relies on the fact that
the Executive long had what is effectively sentencing authority in its
ability to grant or deny parole. That is a particularly curious power for
the dissent to rely upon, inasmuch as most of the dissent discusses (in
great detail) the Sentencing Reform Act, whose principal objective was
to eliminate the Executive’s parole power. Curiouser still is the dissent’s
invocation of the Guidelines system, which “tell[s] the sentencing judge
how, through the use of partially concurrent and partially consecutive
sentences, to build a total sentence that meets the Guidelines’ requirements.” Post, at 4. These “instructions,” ibid., do not cover yet-to-beimposed sentences, the dissent says, because “the sentencing judge
normally does not yet know enough about the behavior that underlies
(or will underlie)” such a sentence. Post, at 5. That explains, perhaps,
why the Guidelines’ “instructions” to judges do not cover them. But
why do not the Guidelines “instruct” the Bureau of Prisons how to
conduct its concurrent/consecutive sentencing? If the reason is (as we
suspect) that the Sentencing Commission does not have, or does not
believe it has, authority to “instruct” the Bureau of Prisons, the dissent’s entire argument based upon what it calls “the purposes and the
mechanics of the SRA’s sentencing system,” post, at 6, falls apart. Yetto-be-imposed sentences are not within the system at all, and we are
simply left with the question whether judges or the Bureau of Prisons
is responsible for them. For the reasons we have given, we think it is
judges.
6 Of course, a district court should exercise the power to impose anticipatory consecutive (or concurrent) sentences intelligently. In some
situations, a district court may have inadequate information and may
forbear, but in other situations, that will not be the case.


SETSER v. UNITED STATES

12

Opinion of the Court

sidering the factors set forth in section 3553(a) to the
extent that they are applicable, if it finds that . . . extraordinary and compelling reasons warrant such a
reduction [or that the defendant meets other criteria
for relief].”
IV
Setser argues that, even if the District Court’s consecutive order was consistent with §3584(a), it made his sentence impossible to implement and therefore unreasonable
under the Act, see United States v. Booker, 543 U. S. 220,
261–262 (2005),7 in light of the State’s decision to make
his sentences concurrent. We think not. There is nothing
unreasonable—let alone inherently impossible—about the
sentence itself. Setser is ordered to serve a 151-month
term in federal custody, and that sentence should run
concurrently with one state sentence and consecutively
with another.
The difficulty arises not from the sentence, but from the
state court’s decision to make both state sentences concurrent. Which of the District Court’s dispositions should
prevail: that his federal sentence run consecutively to the
state sentence on the parole revocation charge, or that his
federal sentence run concurrently with the state sentence
on the new drug charge? If the federal sentence is added
to the state sentence it will not be concurrent with the new
drug charge, and if it is merged in the state sentence it
will not be consecutive to the parole revocation charge.
——————
7 We

have never had occasion to decide whether reasonableness review under Booker applies to a court’s decision that a federal sentence
should run concurrently with or consecutively to another sentence. The
Courts of Appeals, however, generally seem to agree that such review
applies. See, e.g., United States v. Padilla, 618 F. 3d 643, 647 (CA7
2010) (per curiam); United States v. Matera, 489 F. 3d 115, 123–124
(CA2 2007). For purpose of the present case we assume, without
deciding, that it does.


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

Opinion of the Court

This is indeed a problem, but not, we think, one that
shows the District Court’s sentence to be unlawful. The
reasonableness standard we apply in reviewing federal
sentences asks whether the district court abused its discretion. See Gall v. United States, 552 U. S. 38, 46 (2007).
Setser identifies no flaw in the District Court’s decisionmaking process, nor anything available at the time of
sentencing that the District Court failed to consider. That
a sentence is thwarted does not mean that it was unreasonable. If a district court ordered, as a term of supervised release, that a defendant maintain a steady job, but
a subsequent disability rendered gainful employment
infeasible, we doubt that one would call the original sentence an abuse of discretion. There will often be late-onset
facts that materially alter a prisoner’s position and that
make it difficult, or even impossible, to implement his
sentence.
This is where the Bureau of Prisons comes in—which
ultimately has to determine how long the District Court’s
sentence authorizes it to continue Setser’s confinement.
Setser is free to urge the Bureau to credit his time served
in state court based on the District Court’s judgment that
the federal sentence run concurrently with the state sentence for the new drug charges. If the Bureau initially
declines to do so, he may raise his claim through the Bureau’s Administrative Remedy Program. See 28 CFR
§542.10 et seq. (2011). And if that does not work, he may
seek a writ of habeas corpus. See 28 U. S. C. §2241. We
express no view on whether those proceedings would be
successful.
*
*
*
Because it was within the District Court’s discretion to
order that Setser’s sentence run consecutively to his anticipated state sentence in the probation revocation proceeding; and because the state court’s subsequent decision to


14

SETSER v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

make that sentence concurrent with its other sentence
does not establish that the District Court abused its discretion by imposing an unreasonable sentence; we affirm
the judgment of the Court of Appeals.
It is so ordered.


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

15

Opinion of the of the
Appendix A to opinionCourt Court

APPENDIXES 

A

18 U. S. C. §3584

“Multiple sentences of imprisonment
“(a) IMPOSITION OF CONCURRENT OR CONSECUTIVE
TERMS.—If multiple terms of imprisonment are imposed
on a defendant at the same time, or if a term of imprisonment is imposed on a defendant who is already subject to
an undischarged term of imprisonment, the terms may
run concurrently or consecutively, except that the terms
may not run consecutively for an attempt and for another
offense that was the sole objective of the attempt. Multiple terms of imprisonment imposed at the same time run
concurrently unless the court orders or the statute mandates that the terms are to run consecutively. Multiple
terms of imprisonment imposed at different times run
consecutively unless the court orders that the terms are to
run concurrently.
“(b) FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED IN IMPOSING
CONCURRENT OR CONSECUTIVE TERMS.—The court, in
determining whether the terms imposed are to be ordered
to run concurrently or consecutively, shall consider, as to
each offense for which a term of imprisonment is being
imposed, the factors set forth in section 3553(a).
“(c) TREATMENT OF MULTIPLE SENTENCE AS AN
AGGREGATE.—Multiple terms of imprisonment ordered to
run consecutively or concurrently shall be treated for
administrative purposes as a single, aggregate term of
imprisonment.”


16

SETSER v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the of the
Appendix B to opinionCourt Court

B
18 U. S. C. §3621(b) (2006 ed. and Supp. IV)
“PLACE OF IMPRISONMENT.—The Bureau of Prisons shall
designate the place of the prisoner’s imprisonment. The
Bureau may designate any available penal or correctional
facility that meets minimum standards of health and
habitability established by the Bureau, whether maintained by the Federal Government or otherwise and
whether within or without the judicial district in which
the person was convicted, that the Bureau determines to
be appropriate and suitable, considering—
“(1) the resources of the facility contemplated;
“(2) the nature and circumstances of the offense;
“(3) the history and characteristics of the prisoner;
“(4) any statement by the court that imposed the
sentence—
“(A) concerning the purposes for which the sentence
to imprisonment was determined to be warranted; or
“(B) recommending a type of penal or correctional
facility as appropriate; and
“(5) any pertinent policy statement issued by the Sentencing Commission pursuant to section 994(a)(2) of
title 28.
“In designating the place of imprisonment or making
transfers under this subsection, there shall be no favoritism given to prisoners of high social or economic status.
The Bureau may at any time, having regard for the same
matters, direct the transfer of a prisoner from one penal or
correctional facility to another. The Bureau shall make
available appropriate substance abuse treatment for each
prisoner the Bureau determines has a treatable condition
of substance addiction or abuse. Any order, recommendation, or request by a sentencing court that a convicted


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

17

Opinion of the of the
Appendix B to opinionCourt Court

person serve a term of imprisonment in a community
corrections facility shall have no binding effect on the
authority of the Bureau under this section to determine or
change the place of imprisonment of that person.”

