4

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
STEVENS, J., dissenting

presented a special difficulty: Following APHIS’s unlawful
deregulation order, some farmers had begun planting
genetically modified RRA. Id., at 55a. In its preliminary
injunction, the District Court ordered that no new RRA
could be planted until APHIS completed the EIS or the
court determined that some other relief was appropriate.
But, so as to protect these farmers, the court declined to
prohibit them from “harvesting, using, or selling” any
crops they had already planted. Id., at 56a. And “to
minimize the harm to those growers who intend to immi
nently plant Roundup Ready alfalfa,” the court permitted
“[t]hose growers who intend to plant [RRA] in the next
three weeks and have already purchased the seed” to go
ahead and plant. Id., at 58a (emphasis deleted). Essen
tially, the court grandfathered in those farmers who had
relied, in good faith, on APHIS’s actions.
Before determining the scope of its final judgment, the
District Court invited the parties and intervenors to sub
mit “whatever additional evidence” they “wish[ed] to
provide,” and it scheduled additional oral argument. Id.,
at 58a–59a. The parties submitted “competing proposals
for permanent injunctive relief.” Id., at 60a. The plain
tiffs requested that no one—not even the grandfathered-in
farmers—be allowed to plant, grow, or harvest RRA until
the full EIS had been prepared. Id., at 64a. APHIS and
the intervenors instead sought a remedy that would “fa
cilitat[e] the continued and dramatic growth” of RRA: a
“partial deregulation” order that would permit planting
subject to certain conditions, such as specified minimum
distances between RRA and conventional alfalfa and
special cleaning requirements for equipment used on the
genetically modified crop. See id., at 60a–64a.
The court adopted a compromise. First, it declined to
adopt the APHIS-Monsanto proposal. APHIS itself had
acknowledged that “gene transmission could and had
occurred,” and that RRA “could result in the development

