8

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
Opinion of the Court

dents contend, was to restore RRA to the status of a regu­
lated article; and, subject to certain exceptions not appli­
cable here, federal regulations ban the growth and sale of
regulated articles. Because petitioners did not specifically
challenge the District Court’s vacatur, respondents reason,
they lack standing to challenge a part of the District
Court’s order (i.e., the injunction) that does not cause
petitioners any injury not also caused by the vacatur. See
Brief for Respondents 19–20.
Respondents’ argument fails for two independent rea­
sons. First, although petitioners did not challenge the
vacatur directly, they adequately preserved their objection
that the vacated deregulation decision should have been
replaced by APHIS’s proposed injunction. Throughout the
remedial phase of this litigation, one of the main disputes
between the parties has been whether the District Court
was required to adopt APHIS’s proposed judgment. See,
e.g., Intervenor-Appellants’ Opening Brief in No. 07–16458
etc. (CA9), p. 59 (urging the Court of Appeals to “vacate
the district court’s judgment and remand this case to the
district court with instructions to enter APHIS’s proposed
relief”); Opening Brief of Federal Defendants-Appellants
in No. 16458 etc. (CA9), pp. 21, 46 (“The blanket injunc­
tion should be narrowed in accordance with APHIS’s
proposal”); see also Tr. of Oral Arg. 6, 25–27, 53–54. That
judgment would have replaced the vacated deregulation
decision with an order expressly allowing continued plant­
ing of RRA subject to certain limited conditions. App. to
Pet. for Cert. 184a (proposed judgment providing that
“[the federal] defendants’ 14 June 2005 Determination of
Nonregulated Status for Alfalfa Genetically Engineered
for Tolerance to the Herbicide Glyphosate is hereby va­
cated and replaced by the terms of this judgment” (empha­
sis added)). Accordingly, if the District Court had adopted
the agency’s suggested remedy, there would still be au­
thority for the continued planting of RRA, because there

