12

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
Opinion of the Court

injures respondents in several ways. For example, re­
spondents represent that, in order to continue marketing
their product to consumers who wish to buy non­
genetically-engineered alfalfa, respondents would have to
conduct testing to find out whether and to what extent
their crops have been contaminated. See, e.g., Record,
Doc. 62, p. 5 (Declaration of Phillip Geertson in Support of
Plantiffs’ Motion for Summary Judgment) (hereinafter
Geertson Declaration) (“Due to the high potential for
contamination, I will need to test my crops for the pres­
ence of genetically engineered alfalfa seed. This testing
will be a new cost to my seed business and we will have to
raise our seed prices to cover these costs, making our
prices less competitive”); id., Doc. 57, p. 4 (Declaration of
Patrick Trask in Support of Plantiff’s Motion for Summary
Judgment) (“To ensure that my seeds are pure, I will need
to test my crops and obtain certification that my seeds are
free of genetically engineered alfalfa”); see also Record,
Doc. 55, p. 2 (“There is zero tolerance for contaminated
seed in the organic market”). Respondents also allege that
the risk of gene flow will cause them to take certain meas­
ures to minimize the likelihood of potential contamination
and to ensure an adequate supply of non-genetically­
engineered alfalfa. See, e.g., Geertson Declaration 3 (not­
ing the “increased cost of alfalfa breeding due to potential
for genetic contamination”); id., at 6 (“Due to the threat of
contamination, I have begun contracting with growers
outside of the United States to ensure that I can supply
genetically pure, conventional alfalfa seed. Finding new
growers has already resulted in increased administrative
——————
compact geographic area of the prime alfalfa seed producing areas and
the fact that pollen is distributed by bees that have large natural range
of activity”); App. ¶8, p. 401 (Declaration of Marc Asumendi) (“Roundup
alfalfa seed fields are currently being planted in all the major alfalfa
seed production areas with little regard to contamination to non-GMO
seed production fields”).

