Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

Opinion of the Court

even in part, the federal defendants shall prepare an
environmental impact statement.” App. to Pet. for Cert.
108a (emphasis added); see also id., at 79a (“The Court
will enter a final judgment . . . ordering the government to
prepare an EIS before it makes a decision on Monsanto’s
deregulation petition”). The plain text of the order prohib­
its any partial deregulation, not just the particular partial
deregulation embodied in APHIS’s proposed judgment.
We think it is quite clear that the District Court meant
just what it said. The related injunction against planting
states that “no [RRA] . . . may be planted” “[u]ntil the
federal defendants prepare the EIS and decide the deregu­
lation petition.” Id., at 108a (emphasis added). That
injunction, which appears in the very same judgment and
directly follows the injunction against granting Mon­
santo’s petition “even in part,” does not carve out an ex­
ception for planting subsequently authorized by a valid
partial deregulation decision.
In our view, none of the traditional four factors govern­
ing the entry of permanent injunctive relief supports the
District Court’s injunction prohibiting partial deregula­
tion. To see why that is so, it is helpful to understand how
the injunction prohibiting a partial deregulation fits into
the broader dispute between the parties.
Respondents in this case brought suit under the APA to
challenge a particular agency order: APHIS’s decision to
completely deregulate RRA. The District Court held that
the order in question was procedurally defective, and
APHIS decided not to appeal that determination. At that
point, it was for the agency to decide whether and to what
extent it would pursue a partial deregulation. If the
agency found, on the basis of a new EA, that a limited and
temporary deregulation satisfied applicable statutory and
regulatory requirements, it could proceed with such a
deregulation even if it had not yet finished the onerous
EIS required for complete deregulation. If and when the

