16

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
STEVENS, J., dissenting

not impossible—to reverse the harm.” Hollingsworth v.
Perry, 558 U. S. __, __ (2010) (per curiam) (slip op., at 12).
Additional considerations support the District Court’s
judgment. It was clear to the court that APHIS had only
limited capacity to monitor planted RRA, and some RRA
had already been planted. The marginal threat posed by
additional planting was therefore significant. Injunctive
remedies are meant to achieve a “nice adjustment and
reconciliation between the competing claims” of injury by
“mould[ing] each decree to the necessities of the case.”
Weinberger v. Romero-Barcelo, 456 U. S. 305, 312 (1982)
(internal quotation marks omitted). Under these circum
stances, it was not unreasonable for the court to conclude
that the most equitable solution was to allocate the lim
ited amount of potentially safe RRA to the farmers who
had already planted that crop.11
The Court suggests that the injunction was nonetheless
too sweeping because “a partial deregulation need not
cause respondents any injury at all . . . if the scope of the
partial deregulation is sufficiently limited, the risk of gene
flow to their crops could be virtually nonexistent.” Ante, at
21. The Court appears to reach this conclusion by citing
one particular study (in a voluminous record), rather than
any findings of fact.12 Even assuming that this study is
——————
11 As explained previously, I do not see the court’s broad injunction as
“inconsistent,” ante, at 20, with its decision that farmers who had
already planted RRA could harvest their crop. The equities are differ
ent for farmers who relied on the agency than for companies like
Monstanto that developed an organism knowing it might be regulated;
and APHIS could monitor only a limited amount of RRA.
12 The Court also hypothesizes a set of growing conditions that would
isolate RRA from the plaintiffs in this case, even if not from other
farmers. See ante, at 21–22. As already explained, these hypotheticals
are rather unrealistic. See n. 8, supra. And, given that the plaintiffs
include environmental organizations as well as farmer and consumer
associations, it is hard to see how APHIS could so carefully isolate and
protect their interests. In any event, because APHIS concedes that it

