Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

21

Opinion of the Court

preliminary relief. See 5 U. S. C. §§702, 705. Accordingly,
a permanent injunction is not now needed to guard
against any present or imminent risk of likely irreparable
harm.
Second, a partial deregulation need not cause respon­
dents any injury at all, much less irreparable injury; if the
scope of the partial deregulation is sufficiently limited, the
risk of gene flow to their crops could be virtually nonexis­
tent. For example, suppose that APHIS deregulates RRA
only in a remote part of the country in which respondents
neither grow nor intend to grow non-genetically­
engineered alfalfa, and in which no conventional alfalfa
farms are currently located. Suppose further that APHIS
issues an accompanying administrative order mandating
isolation distances so great as to eliminate any apprecia­
ble risk of gene flow to the crops of conventional farmers
who might someday choose to plant in the surrounding
area. See, e.g., Brief in Opposition 9, n. 6 (quoting study
concluding “ ‘that in order for there to be zero tolerance of
any gene flow between a [RRA] seed field and a conven­
tional seed field, those fields would have to have a five­
mile isolation distance between them’ ”); see also Tr. of
Oral Arg. 15–16 (representation from the Solicitor General
that APHIS may impose conditions on the deregulation of
RRA via issuance of an administrative order). Finally,
suppose that APHIS concludes in a new EA that its lim­
ited deregulation would not pose a significant risk of gene
flow or harmful weed development, and that the agency
adopts a plan to police vigorously compliance with its
administrative order in the limited geographic area in
question. It is hard to see how respondents could show
that such a limited deregulation would cause them likely
irreparable injury. (Respondents in this case do not repre­
sent a class, so they could not seek to enjoin such an order
on the ground that it might cause harm to other parties.)
In any case, the District Court’s order prohibiting any

