4

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
Opinion of the Court

considering the hundreds of public comments that it re­
ceived, APHIS issued a Finding of No Significant Impact
and decided to deregulate RRA unconditionally and with­
out preparing an EIS. Prior to this decision, APHIS had
authorized almost 300 field trials of RRA conducted over a
period of eight years. App. 348.
Approximately eight months after APHIS granted RRA
nonregulated status, respondents (two conventional alfalfa
seed farms and environmental groups concerned with food
safety) filed this action against the Secretary of Agricul­
ture and certain other officials in Federal District Court,
challenging APHIS’s decision to completely deregulate
RRA. Their complaint alleged violations of NEPA, the
Endangered Species Act of 1973 (ESA), 87 Stat. 884, 16
U. S. C. §1531 et seq., and the PPA. Respondents did not
seek preliminary injunctive relief pending resolution of
those claims. Hence, RRA enjoyed nonregulated status for
approximately two years. During that period, more than
3,000 farmers in 48 States planted an estimated 220,000
acres of RRA. App. 350.
In resolving respondents’ NEPA claim, the District
Court accepted APHIS’s determination that RRA does not
have any harmful health effects on humans or livestock.
App. to Pet. for Cert. 43a; accord, id., at 45a. Neverthe­
less, the District Court held that APHIS violated NEPA by
deregulating RRA without first preparing an EIS. In
particular, the court found that APHIS’s EA failed to
answer substantial questions concerning two broad conse­
quences of its proposed action: first, the extent to which
complete deregulation would lead to the transmission of
the gene conferring glyphosate tolerance from RRA to
organic and conventional alfalfa; and, second, the extent to
which the introduction of RRA would contribute to the
development of Roundup-resistant weeds. Id., at 52a. In
light of its determination that the deregulation decision
ran afoul of NEPA, the District Court dismissed without

