20

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
Opinion of the Court

at the time of the decision, and—consequently—no matter
how small the risk that the planting authorized under
such conditions would adversely affect the environment in
general and respondents in particular.
The order enjoining any partial deregulation was also
inconsistent with other aspects of the very same judgment.
In fashioning its remedy for the NEPA violation, the
District Court steered a “middle course” between more
extreme options on either end. See id., at 1136. On the
one hand, the District Court rejected APHIS’s proposal
(supported by petitioners) to allow continued planting and
harvesting of RRA subject to the agency’s proposed limita­
tions. On the other hand, the District Court did not bar
continued planting of RRA as a regulated article under
permit from APHIS, see App. to Pet. for Cert. 75a, and it
expressly allowed farmers to harvest and sell RRA planted
before March 30, 2007, id., at 76a–79a. If the District
Court was right to conclude that any partial deregulation,
no matter how limited, required the preparation of an EIS,
it is hard to see why the limited planting and harvesting
that the District Court allowed did not also require the
preparation of an EIS. Conversely, if the District Court
was right to conclude that the limited planting and har­
vesting it allowed did not require the preparation of an
EIS, then an appropriately limited partial deregulation
should likewise have been possible.
Based on the analysis set forth above, it is clear that the
order enjoining any deregulation whatsoever does not
satisfy the traditional four-factor test for granting perma­
nent injunctive relief. Most importantly, respondents
cannot show that they will suffer irreparable injury if
APHIS is allowed to proceed with any partial deregula­
tion, for at least two independent reasons.
First, if and when APHIS pursues a partial deregulation
that arguably runs afoul of NEPA, respondents may file a
new suit challenging such action and seeking appropriate

