Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

STEVENS, J., dissenting

2007 may be grown, harvested and sold subject to the
following conditions.” Id., at 108a–109a.
II
Before proceeding to address the Court’s opinion on its
own terms, it is important to note that I have reservations
about the validity of those terms. The Court today rests
not only the bulk of its analysis but also the primary basis
for our jurisdiction on the premise that the District Court
enjoined APHIS from partially deregulating RRA in any
sense. See ante, at 9–11, 16–23.1 That is a permissible,
but not necessarily correct, reading of the District Court’s
judgment.
So far as I can tell, until petitioners’ reply brief, neither
petitioners nor the Government submitted to us that the
District Court had exceeded its authority in this manner.
And, indeed, the Government had not raised this issue in
any court at all. Petitioners did not raise the issue in any
of their three questions presented or in the body of their
petition for a writ or certiorari. And they did not raise the
issue in their opening briefs to this Court. Only after
respondents alleged that Monsanto’s injury would not be
redressed by vacating the injunction, insofar as RRA
would still be a regulated article, did petitioners bring the
issue to the Court’s attention. Explaining why they have a
redressable injury, petitioners alleged that the District
Court’s order prevents APHIS from “implement[ing] an[y]
——————
1 See also ante, at 19–20 (“[T]he District Court barred the agency
from pursuing any deregulation—no matter how limited the geographic
area in which planting of RRA would be allowed, how great the isola
tion distances mandated between RRA fields and fields for growing
non-genetically-engineered alfalfa, how stringent the regulations
governing harvesting and distribution, how robust the enforcement
mechanisms available at the time of the decision, and—consequently—
no matter how small the risk that the planting authorized under such
conditions would adversely affect the environment in general and
respondents in particular” (emphasis deleted)).

