Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

Opinion of the Court

Nor can the District Court’s injunction be justified as a
prophylactic measure needed to guard against the possi­
bility that the agency would seek to effect on its own the
particular partial deregulation scheme embodied in the
terms of APHIS’s proposed judgment. Even if the District
Court was not required to adopt that judgment, there was
no need to stop the agency from effecting a partial deregu­
lation in accordance with the procedures established by
law. Moreover, the terms of the District Court’s injunction
do not just enjoin the particular partial deregulation
embodied in APHIS’s proposed judgment. Instead, the
District Court barred the agency from pursuing any de­
regulation—no matter how limited the geographic area in
which planting of RRA would be allowed, how great the
isolation distances mandated between RRA fields and
fields for growing non-genetically-engineered alfalfa, how
stringent the regulations governing harvesting and distri­
bution, how robust the enforcement mechanisms available
——————
dation or report on proposals for legislation and other major Federal
actions significantly affecting the quality of the human environment.”
42 U. S. C. §4332(2)(C) (emphasis added); see also Kleppe v. Sierra
Club, 427 U. S. 390, 406 (1976) (“A court has no authority to depart
from the statutory language and . . . determine a point during the
germination process of a potential proposal at which an impact state­
ment should be prepared” (first emphasis added)). When a particular
agency proposal exists and requires the preparation of an EIS, NEPA
regulations allow the agency to take at least some action pertaining to
that proposal during the pendency of the EIS process. See 40 CFR
§§1506.1(a), (c) (2009). We do not express any view on the Govern­
ment’s contention that a limited deregulation of the kind embodied in
its proposed judgment would not require the prior preparation of an
EIS. See Brief for Federal Respondents 21–22 (citing §1506.1(a)); Tr. of
Oral Arg. 20 (“what we were proposing for the interim, that is allowing
continued planting subject to various protective measures, was funda­
mentally different from the action on which the EIS was being pre­
pared”). Because APHIS has not yet invoked the procedures necessary
to attempt a limited deregulation, any judicial consideration of such
issues is not warranted at this time.

