8

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
STEVENS, J., dissenting

interim solution allowing continued planting.” Reply Brief
for Petitioners 5. APHIS, the party that the Court says
was wrongly “barred . . . from pursuing any deregulation,”
even “in accordance with the procedures established by
law,” ante, at 19, did not complain about this aspect of the
District Court’s order even in its reply brief.
Thus, notwithstanding that petitioners “adequately
preserved their objection that the vacated deregulation
decision should have been replaced by APHIS’s proposed
injunction,” ante, at 8 (emphasis added), the key legal
premise on which the Court decides this case was never
adequately presented. Of course, this is not standard—or
sound—judicial practice. See Kumho Tire Co. v. Carmi
chael, 526 U. S. 137, 159 (1999) (STEVENS, J., concurring
in part and dissenting in part). Today’s decision illus
trates why, for it is quite unclear whether the Court’s
premise is correct, and the Court has put itself in the
position of deciding legal issues without the aid of briefing.
In my view, the District Court’s judgment can fairly be
read to address only (1) total deregulation orders of the
kind that spawned this lawsuit, and (2) the particular
partial deregulation order proposed to the court by APHIS.
This interpretation of the judgment is more consistent
with the District Court’s accompanying opinion, which
concluded by stating that the court “will enter a final
judgment” “ordering the government to prepare an EIS
before [the court] makes a decision on Monsanto’s deregu
lation petition.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 79a. The language
of that opinion does not appear to “ba[r] the agency from
pursuing any deregulation—no matter how limited,” ante,
at 19 (emphasis deleted). This interpretation is also more
consistent with APHIS’s own decision not to contest what,
according to the Court, was an unprecedented infringe
ment on the agency’s statutory authority.
To be sure, the District Court’s judgment is somewhat
opaque. But it is troubling that we may be asserting

