6

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
Opinion of the Court

2007. Id., at 58a. In its subsequently entered permanent
injunction and judgment, the court (1) vacated APHIS’s
deregulation decision; (2) ordered APHIS to prepare an
EIS before it made any decision on Monsanto’s deregula­
tion petition; (3) enjoined the planting of any RRA in the
United States after March 30, 2007, pending APHIS’s
completion of the required EIS; and (4) imposed certain
conditions (suggested by APHIS) on the handling and
identification of already-planted RRA. Id., at 79a, 109a.
The District Court denied petitioners’ request for an evi­
dentiary hearing.
The Government, Monsanto, and FGI appealed, chal­
lenging the scope of the relief granted but not disputing
the existence of a NEPA violation. See Geertson Seed
Farms v. Johanns, 570 F. 3d 1130, 1136 (2009). A divided
panel of the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit af­
firmed. Based on its review of the record, the panel first
concluded that the District Court had “recognized that an
injunction does not ‘automatically issue’ when a NEPA
violation is found” and had instead based its issuance of
injunctive relief on the four-factor test traditionally used
for that purpose. Id., at 1137. The panel held that the
District Court had not committed clear error in making
any of the subsidiary factual findings on which its assess­
ment of the four relevant factors was based. And the
panel rejected the claim that the District Court had not
given sufficient deference to APHIS’s expertise concerning
the likely effects of allowing continued planting of RRA on
a limited basis. In the panel’s view, APHIS’s proposed
interim measures would have perpetuated a system that
had been found by the District Court to have caused envi­
ronmental harm in the past. Id., at 1139. Hence, the
panel concluded that the District Court had not abused its
discretion “in choosing to reject APHIS’s proposed mitiga­
tion measures in favor of a broader injunction to prevent
more irreparable harm from occurring.” Ibid.

