Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

STEVENS, J., dissenting

Moreover, given that APHIS had already been ordered
to conduct an EIS on deregulation of RRA, the court could
have reasonably feared that partial deregulation would
undermine the agency’s eventual decision. Courts con
fronted with NEPA violations regularly adopt interim
measures to maintain the status quo, particularly if allow
ing agency action to go forward risks foreclosing alterna
tive courses of action that the agency might have adopted
following completion of an EIS. See D. Mandelker, NEPA
Law and Litigation §4:61. The applicable regulations, to
which the District Court owed deference,9 provide that
during the preparation of an EIS, “no action concerning
the [agency’s] proposal shall be taken which would . . .
[h]ave an adverse environmental impact” or “[l]imit the
choice of reasonable alternatives.” 40 CFR §1506.1(a)
(2009). As exemplified by the problem of what to do with
farmers who had already purchased or planted RRA prior
to the District Court’s judgment, even minimal deregula
tion can limit future regulatory options. “Courts must
remember that in many cases allowing an agency to pro
ceed makes a mockery of the EIS process, converting it
——————
accompanying order “mandating isolation distances so great as to
eliminate any appreciable risk of gene flow to the crops of conventional
farmers who might someday choose to plant in the surrounding area.”
Ante, at 21. At the outset, it is important to note the difference be
tween a plausible hypothetical and a piece of fiction. At least as of
2007, APHIS had never granted partial approval of a petition for
nonregulated status. See n. 6, supra. And I doubt that it would choose
to deregulate genetically modified alfalfa in a place where the growing
conditions and sales networks for the product are so poor that no
farmer already plants it. Moreover, the notion that this imagined
deregulation would pose virtually no environmental risk ignores one of
the District Court’s critical findings of fact: APHIS has very limited
capacity to monitor its own restrictions. The agency could place all
manner of constraints on its deregulation orders; they will have no
effect unless they are enforced.
9 See Marsh v. Oregon Natural Resources Council, 490 U. S. 360, 372
(1989).

