2

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
STEVENS, J., dissenting

poration that has long produced a weed killer called
Roundup. After years of experimentation, Monsanto and
co-petitioner Forage Genetics International (FGI) geneti
cally engineered a mutation in the alfalfa genome that
makes the plant immune to Roundup. Monsanto and
FGI’s new product, RRA, is “the first crop that has been
engineered to resist a[n] herbicide” and that can transmit
the genetically engineered gene to other plants. See App.
to Pet. for Cert. 45a.
In 2004, in the midst of a deregulatory trend in the
agricultural sector, petitioners asked APHIS to deregulate
RRA, thereby allowing it to be sold and planted nation
wide. App. 101a. Rather than conducting a detailed
analysis and preparing an “environmental impact state
ment” (EIS), as required by the National Environmental
Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA) for every “major Federal ac
tio[n] significantly affecting the quality of the human
environment,” 42 U. S. C. §4332(2)(C), APHIS merely
conducted an abbreviated “environmental assessment”
(EA). During the 6-month period in which APHIS allowed
public comment on its EA, the agency received 663 com
ments, 520 of which opposed deregulation. App. to Pet. for
Cert. 29a. Farmers and scientists opined that RRA could
contaminate alfalfa that has not been genetically modified,
destroying the American export market for alfalfa and,
potentially, contaminating other plants and breeding a
new type of pesticide-resistant weed. Id., at 29a–30a.
Despite substantial evidence that RRA genes could
transfer to other plants, APHIS issued a Finding of No
Significant Impact and agreed to deregulate RRA “uncon
ditionally,” ante, at 4. With no EIS to wait for and no
regulation blocking its path, petitioners began selling
RRA. Farmers and environmental groups swiftly brought
this lawsuit to challenge APHIS’s decision to deregulate,
raising claims under NEPA and other statutes.
The District Court carefully reviewed a long record and

