16

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
Opinion of the Court

not automatically issue” in NEPA cases. See 570 F. 3d, at
1137 (internal quotation marks omitted). It is not enough
for a court considering a request for injunctive relief to ask
whether there is a good reason why an injunction should
not issue; rather, a court must determine that an injunc­
tion should issue under the traditional four-factor test set
out above.
Notwithstanding the lower courts’ apparent reliance on
the incorrect standard set out in the pre-Winter Circuit
precedents quoted above, respondents argue that the
lower courts in fact applied the traditional four-factor test.
In their view, the statements that injunctive relief is
proper in the “run-of-the-mill” NEPA case, and that such
injunctions are granted except in “unusual circumstances,”
are descriptive rather than prescriptive. See Brief for
Respondents 28, n. 14. We need not decide whether re­
spondents’ characterization of the lower court opinions in
this case is sound. Even if it is, the injunctive relief
granted here cannot stand.
C
We first consider whether the District Court erred in
enjoining APHIS from partially deregulating RRA during
the pendency of the EIS process.4
The relevant part of the District Court’s judgment states
that, “[b]efore granting Monsanto’s deregulation petition,
——————
4 Petitioners

focus their challenge on the part of the District Court’s
order prohibiting the planting of RRA. As we explain below, however,
the broad injunction against planting cannot be valid if the injunction
against partial deregulation is improper. See infra, at 23; see also App.
to Pet. for Cert. 64a (District Court order recognizing that APHIS’s
proposed remedy “seek[s], in effect, a partial deregulation that permits
the continued expansion of the Roundup Ready alfalfa market subject
to certain conditions” (emphasis added)). The validity of the injunction
prohibiting partial deregulation is therefore properly before us. Like
the District Court, we use the term “partial deregulation” to refer to
any limited or conditional deregulation. See id., at 64a, 69a.

