Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
standing the District Court’s vacatur, because there would, in effect,
be a new deregulation decision. Second, petitioners in any case have
standing to challenge the part of the District Court’s order enjoining
a partial deregulation. Respondents focus their argument on the part
of the judgment that enjoins planting, but the judgment also states
that before granting the deregulation petition, even in part, the
agency must prepare an EIS. That part of the judgment inflicts an
injury not also caused by the vacatur. Pp. 7–11.
(b) Respondents have constitutional standing to seek injunctive
relief from the complete deregulation order at issue here. The Court
disagrees with petitioners’ argument that respondents have failed to
show that any of them is likely to suffer a constitutionally cognizable
injury absent injunctive relief. The District Court found that respon
dent farmers had established a reasonable probability that their con
ventional alfalfa crops would be infected with the engineered
Roundup Ready gene if RRA were completely deregulated. A sub
stantial risk of such gene flow injures respondents in several ways
that are sufficiently concrete to satisfy the injury-in-fact prong of the
constitutional standing analysis. Moreover, those harms are readily
attributable to APHIS’s deregulation decision, which gives rise to a
significant risk of gene flow to non-genetically-engineered alfalfa va
rieties. Finally, a judicial order prohibiting the planting or deregula
tion of all or some genetically engineered alfalfa would redress re
spondents’ injuries by eliminating or minimizing the risk of gene flow
to their crops. Pp. 11–14.
2. The District Court abused its discretion in enjoining APHIS from
effecting a partial deregulation and in prohibiting the planting of
RRA pending the agency’s completion of its detailed environmental
review. Pp. 14–22.
(a) Because petitioners and the Government do not argue other
wise, the Court assumes without deciding that the District Court
acted lawfully in vacating the agency’s decision to completely deregu
late RRA. The Court therefore addresses only the injunction prohib
iting APHIS from deregulating RRA pending completion of the EIS,
and the nationwide injunction prohibiting almost all RRA planting
during the pendency of the EIS process. P. 14.
(b) Before a court may grant a permanent injunction, the plain
tiff must satisfy a four-factor test, demonstrating: “(1) that it has suf
fered an irreparable injury; (2) that remedies available at law, such
as monetary damages, are inadequate to compensate for that injury;
(3) that, considering the balance of hardships between the plaintiff
and defendant, a remedy in equity is warranted; and (4) that the pub
lic interest would not be disserved by a permanent injunction.” eBay
Inc. v. MercExchange, L. L. C., 547 U. S. 388, 391. This test fully ap

