2

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
Syllabus
deregulation request, APHIS prepared a draft EA and solicited public
comments on its proposed course of action. Based on its EA and the
comments submitted, the agency determined that the introduction of
RRA would not have any significant adverse impact on the environ
ment. Accordingly, APHIS decided to deregulate RRA uncondition
ally and without preparing an EIS. Respondents, conventional al
falfa growers and environmental groups, filed this action challenging
that decision on the ground that it violated NEPA and other federal
laws. The District Court held, inter alia, that APHIS violated NEPA
when it deregulated RRA without first completing a detailed EIS. To
remedy that violation, the court vacated the agency’s decision com
pletely deregulating RRA; enjoined APHIS from deregulating RRA,
in whole or in part, pending completion of the EIS; and entered a na
tionwide permanent injunction prohibiting almost all future planting
of RRA during the pendency of the EIS process. Petitioners and the
Government appealed, challenging the scope of the relief granted but
not disputing that APHIS’s deregulation decision violated NEPA.
The Ninth Circuit affirmed, concluding, among other things, that the
District Court had not abused its discretion in rejecting APHIS’s pro
posed mitigation measures in favor of a broader injunction.

Held:
1. Respondents have standing to seek injunctive relief, and peti
tioners have standing to seek this Court’s review of the Ninth Cir
cuit’s judgment affirming the entry of such relief. Pp. 7–14.
(a) Petitioners have constitutional standing to seek review here.
Article III standing requires an injury that is (i) concrete, particular
ized, and actual or imminent, (ii) fairly traceable to the challenged
action, and (iii) redressable by a favorable ruling. See Horne v. Flo
res, 557 U. S. ___, ___. Petitioners satisfy all three criteria. Petition
ers are injured by their inability to sell or license RRA to prospective
customers until APHIS completes the EIS. Because that injury is
caused by the very remedial order that petitioners challenge on ap
peal, it would be redressed by a favorable ruling from this Court. Re
spondents nevertheless contend that petitioners lack standing be
cause their complained-of injury is independently caused by a part of
the District Court’s order that petitioners failed to challenge, the va
catur of APHIS’s deregulation decision. That argument fails for two
independent reasons. First, one of the main disputes between the
parties throughout this litigation has been whether the District
Court should have adopted APHIS’s proposed judgment, which would
have replaced the vacated deregulation decision with an order ex
pressly authorizing the continued sale and planting of RRA. Accord
ingly, if the District Court had adopted APHIS’s proposed judgment,
there would still be authority for the continued sale of RRA notwith

