Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

STEVENS, J., dissenting

found that “APHIS’s reasons for concluding” that the risks
of genetic contamination are low were “not ‘convincing.’ ”
App. to Pet. for Cert. 38a. A review of APHIS’s internal
documents showed that individuals within the agency
warned that contamination might occur. APHIS rested its
decision to deregulate on its assertion that contamination
risk is “not significant because it is the organic and con
ventional farmers’ responsibility” to protect themselves
and the environment. Ibid. Yet the agency drew this
conclusion without having investigated whether such
farmers “can, in fact, protect their crops from contamina
tion.” Ibid. The District Court likewise found that
APHIS’s reasons for disregarding the risk of pesticide
resistant weeds were speculative and “not convincing.”
Id., at 46a. The agency had merely explained that if
weeds acquire roundup resistance, farmers can use “ ‘[a]l
ternative herbicides.’ ” Ibid. In light of the “acknowl
edged” risk of RRA gene transmission and the potential
“impact on the development of Roundup resistant weeds,”
the court concluded that there was a significant possibility
of serious environmental harm, and granted summary
judgment for the plaintiffs. Id., at 54a; see also id., at 45a.
At this point, the question of remedy arose. The parties
submitted proposed final judgments, and several corpora
tions with an interest in RRA, including Monsanto, sought
permission to intervene. The District Court granted their
motion and agreed “to give them the opportunity to pre
sent evidence to assist the court in fashioning the appro
priate scope of whatever relief is granted.” Id., at 54a
(internal quotation marks omitted).
While the District Court considered the proposed judg
ments, it issued a preliminary injunction. Ordinarily, the
court explained, the remedy for failure to conduct an EIS
is to vacate the permit that was unlawfully given—the
result of which, in this case, would be to prohibit any use
of RRA. See id., at 55a; see also id., at 65a. But this case

