4

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
Syllabus
plies in NEPA cases. See Winter v. Natural Resources Defense Coun
cil, Inc., 555 U. S. ___, ___. Thus, the existence of a NEPA violation
does not create a presumption that injunctive relief is available and
should be granted absent unusual circumstances. Pp. 15–16.
(c) None of the four factors supports the District Court’s order en
joining APHIS from partially deregulating RRA during the pendency
of the EIS process. Most importantly, respondents cannot show that
they will suffer irreparable injury if APHIS is allowed to proceed with
any partial deregulation, for at least two reasons. First, if and when
APHIS pursues a partial deregulation that arguably runs afoul of
NEPA, respondents may file a new suit challenging such action and
seeking appropriate preliminary relief. Accordingly, a permanent in
junction is not now needed to guard against any present or imminent
risk of likely irreparable harm. Second, a partial deregulation need
not cause respondents any injury at all; if its scope is sufficiently lim
ited, the risk of gene flow could be virtually nonexistent. Indeed, the
broad injunction entered below essentially pre-empts the very proce
dure by which APHIS could determine, independently of the pending
EIS process for assessing the effects of a complete deregulation, that
a limited deregulation would not pose any appreciable risk of envi
ronmental harm. Pp. 16–23.
(d) The District Court also erred in entering the nationwide in
junction against planting RRA, for two independent reasons. First,
because it was inappropriate for the District Court to foreclose even
the possibility of a partial and temporary deregulation, it follows that
it was inappropriate to enjoin planting in accordance with such a de
regulation decision. Second, an injunction is a drastic and extraordi
nary remedy, which should not be granted as a matter of course. See,
e.g., Weinberger v. Romero-Barcelo, 456 U. S. 305, 312. If, as respon
dents now concede, a less drastic remedy (such as partial or complete
vacatur of APHIS’s deregulation decision) was sufficient to redress
their injury, no recourse to the additional and extraordinary relief of
an injunction was warranted. Pp. 23–24.
(e) Given the District Court’s errors, this Court need not address
whether injunctive relief of some kind was available to respondents
on the record below. Pp. 24–25.

570 F. 3d 1130, reversed and remanded.
ALITO, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS, C. J.,
and SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, GINSBURG, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined.
STEVENS, J., filed a dissenting opinion. BREYER, J., took no part in the
consideration or decision of the case.

