10

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
Opinion of the Court

required, we perceive no basis on which the District Court
could decline to remand the matter to the agency so that it
could determine whether to pursue a partial deregulation
during the pendency of the EIS process.
Nor is any doubt as to whether APHIS would issue a
new EA in favor of a partial deregulation sufficient to
defeat petitioners’ standing. It is undisputed that peti­
tioners have submitted a deregulation petition and that a
partial deregulation of the kind embodied in the agency’s
proposed judgment would afford petitioners much of the
relief that they seek; it is also undisputed that, absent the
District Court’s order, APHIS could attempt to effect such
a partial deregulation pending its completion of the EIS.
See id., at 7–8, 25–27, 38. For purposes of resolving the
particular standing question before us, we need not decide
whether or to what extent a party challenging an injunc­
tion that bars an agency from granting certain relief must
show that the agency would be likely to afford such relief
if it were free to do so. In this case, as is clear from
APHIS’s proposed judgment and from its briefing
throughout the remedial phase of this litigation, the
agency takes the view that a partial deregulation reflect­
ing its proposed limitations is in the public interest. Thus,
there is more than a strong likelihood that APHIS would
partially deregulate RRA were it not for the District
Court’s injunction. The District Court’s elimination of
that likelihood is plainly sufficient to establish a constitu­
tionally cognizable injury. Moreover, as respondents
essentially conceded at oral argument, that injury would
be redressed by a favorable decision here, since “vacating
the current injunction . . . will allow [petitioners] to go
back to the agency, [to] seek a partial deregulation,” even
if the District Court’s vacatur of APHIS’s deregulation
decision is left intact. Id., at 38. We therefore hold that

