Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of the Court

prejudice respondents’ claims under the ESA and PPA.
After these rulings, the District Court granted petition­
ers permission to intervene in the remedial phase of the
lawsuit. The court then asked the parties to submit pro­
posed judgments embodying their preferred means of
remedying the NEPA violation. APHIS’s proposed judg­
ment would have ordered the agency to prepare an EIS,
vacated the agency’s deregulation decision, and replaced
that decision with the terms of the judgment itself. Id., at
184a (proposed judgment providing that “[the federal]
defendants’ [June 14,] 2005 Determination of Nonregu­
lated Status for Alfalfa Genetically Engineered for Toler­
ance to the Herbicide Glyphosate is hereby vacated and
replaced by the terms of this judgment” (emphasis added)).
The terms of the proposed judgment, in turn, would have
permitted the continued planting of RRA pending comple­
tion of the EIS, subject to six restrictions. Those restric­
tions included, among other things, mandatory isolation
distances between RRA and non-genetically-engineered
alfalfa fields in order to mitigate the risk of gene flow;
mandatory harvesting conditions; a requirement that
planting and harvesting equipment that had been in
contact with RRA be cleaned prior to any use with conven­
tional or organic alfalfa; identification and handling re­
quirements for RRA seed; and a requirement that all RRA
seed producers and hay growers be under contract with
either Monsanto or FGI and that their contracts require
compliance with the other limitations set out in the pro­
posed judgment.
The District Court rejected APHIS’s proposed judgment.
In its preliminary injunction, the District Court prohibited
almost all future planting of RRA pending APHIS’s com­
pletion of the required EIS. But in order to minimize the
harm to farmers who had relied on APHIS’s deregulation
decision, the court expressly allowed those who had al­
ready purchased RRA to plant their seeds until March 30,

