22

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
Opinion of the Court

partial deregulation improperly relieves respondents of
their burden to make the requisite evidentiary showing.6
Of course, APHIS might ultimately choose not to par­
tially deregulate RRA during the pendency of the EIS, or
else to pursue the kind of partial deregulation embodied in
its proposed judgment rather than the very limited de­
regulation envisioned in the above hypothetical. Until
such time as the agency decides whether and how to exer­
cise its regulatory authority, however, the courts have no
cause to intervene. Indeed, the broad injunction entered
here essentially pre-empts the very procedure by which
the agency could determine, independently of the pending
EIS process for assessing the effects of a complete deregu­
lation, that a limited deregulation would not pose any
appreciable risk of environmental harm. See 40 CFR
§§1501.4, 1508.9(a) (2009).
In sum, we do not know whether and to what extent
APHIS would seek to effect a limited deregulation during
the pendency of the EIS process if it were free to do so; we
do know that the vacatur of APHIS’s deregulation decision
means that virtually no RRA can be grown or sold until
such time as a new deregulation decision is in place, and
we also know that any party aggrieved by a hypothetical
future deregulation decision will have ample opportunity
——————
6 The District Court itself appears to have recognized that its broad
injunction may not have been necessary to avert any injury to respon­
dents. See App. to Pet. for Cert. 191a (“It does complicate it to try to
fine-tune a particular remedy. So the simpler the remedy, the more
attractive it is from the Court’s point of view, because it appears to me
enforcement is easier. Understanding it is easier, and it may be, while
a blunt instrument, it may actually, for the short term, achieve its
result, achieve its purpose, even maybe it overachieves it. . . . Maybe a
lot of it is not necessary. I don’t know” (emphasis added)); see also ibid.
(“I don’t say you have to be greater than 1.6 miles, you have to be away
from the bees, you have be dah dah dah. That’s the farm business. I’m
not even in it”); id., at 192a (“I am not going to get into the isolation
distances”).

