(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

MONSANTO CO. ET AL. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS

ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–475.

Argued April 27, 2010—Decided June 21, 2010

The Plant Protection Act (PPA) provides that the Secretary of the De
partment of Agriculture may issue regulations “to prevent the intro
duction of plant pests into the United States or the dissemination of
plant pests within the United States.” 7 U. S. C. §7711(a). Pursuant
to that grant of authority, the Animal and Plant Health Inspection
Service (APHIS) promulgated regulations that presume genetically
engineered plants to be “plant pests”—and thus “regulated articles”
under the PPA—until APHIS determines otherwise. However, any
person may petition APHIS for a determination that a regulated arti
cle does not present a plant pest risk and therefore should not be sub
ject to the applicable regulations. APHIS may grant such a petition
in whole or in part.
In determining whether to grant nonregulated status to a geneti
cally engineered plant variety, APHIS must comply with the Na
tional Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA), which requires fed
eral agencies “to the fullest extent possible” to prepare a detailed
environmental impact statement (EIS) for “every . . . major Federal
actio[n] significantly affecting the quality of the human environ
ment.” 42 U. S. C. §4332(2)(C). The agency need not complete an
EIS if it finds, based on a shorter statement known as an environ
mental assessment (EA), that the proposed action will not have a
significant environmental impact.
This case involves a challenge to APHIS’s decision to approve the
unconditional deregulation of Roundup Ready Alfalfa (RRA), a vari
ety of alfalfa that has been genetically engineered to tolerate the her
bicide Roundup. Petitioners are the owner and the licensee of the in
tellectual property rights to RRA. In response to petitioners’

