Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

STEVENS, J., dissenting

jurisdiction and deciding a highly factbound case based on
nothing more than a misunderstanding. It is also trou
bling that we may be making law without adequate brief
ing on the critical questions we are passing upon. I would
not be surprised if on remand the District Court merely
clarified its order.
III
Even assuming that the majority has correctly inter
preted the District Court’s judgment, I do not agree that
we should reverse the District Court.
At the outset, it is important to observe that when a
district court is faced with an unlawful agency action, a
set of parties who have relied on that action, and a prayer
for relief to avoid irreparable harm, the court is operating
under its powers of equity. In such a case, a court’s func
tion is “to do equity and to mould each decree to the neces
sities of the particular case.” Hecht Co. v. Bowles, 321
U. S. 321, 329 (1944). “Flexibility” and “practicality” are
the touchtones of these remedial determinations, as “the
public interest,” “private needs,” and “competing private
claims” must all be weighed and reconciled against the
background of the court’s own limitations and its particu
lar familiarity with the case. Id., at 329–330.2
When a district court takes on the equitable role of
adjusting legal obligations, we review the remedy it crafts
——————
2 See

also, e.g., Railroad Comm’n of Tex. v. Pullman Co., 312 U. S.
496, 500 (1941) (“The history of equity jurisdiction is the history of
regard for public consequences. . . . There have been as many and as
variegated applications of this supple principle as the situations that
have brought it into play”); Seymour v. Freer, 8 Wall. 202, 218 (1869)
(“[A] court of equity ha[s] unquestionable authority to apply its flexible
and comprehensive jurisdiction in such manner as might be necessary
to the right administration of justice between the parties”). Indeed, the
very “ground of this jurisdiction” is a court’s “ability to give a more
complete and perfect remedy.” 2 J. Story, Equity Jurisprudence §924,
p. 225 (M. Bigelow ed. 13th ed. 1886).

