Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of the Court

costs at my seed business”).
Such harms, which respondents will suffer even if their
crops are not actually infected with the Roundup ready
gene, are sufficiently concrete to satisfy the injury-in-fact
prong of the constitutional standing analysis. Those
harms are readily attributable to APHIS’s deregulation
decision, which, as the District Court found, gives rise to a
significant risk of gene flow to non-genetically-engineered
varieties of alfalfa. Finally, a judicial order prohibiting
the growth and sale of all or some genetically engineered
alfalfa would remedy respondents’ injuries by eliminating
or minimizing the risk of gene flow to conventional and
organic alfalfa crops. We therefore conclude that respon­
dents have constitutional standing to seek injunctive relief
from the complete deregulation order at issue here.
Petitioners appear to suggest that respondents fail to
satisfy the “zone of interests” test we have previously
articulated as a prudential standing requirement in cases
challenging agency compliance with particular statutes.
See Reply Brief for Petitioners 12 (arguing that protection
against the risk of commercial harm “is not an interest
that NEPA was enacted to address”); Bennett v. Spear, 520
U. S. 154, 162–163 (1997). That argument is unpersua­
sive because, as the District Court found, respondents’
injury has an environmental as well as an economic com­
ponent. See App. to Pet. for Cert. 49a. In its ruling on the
merits of respondents’ NEPA claim, the District Court
held that the risk that the RRA gene conferring gly­
phosate resistance will infect conventional and organic
alfalfa is a significant environmental effect within the
meaning of NEPA. Petitioners did not appeal that part of
the court’s ruling, and we have no occasion to revisit it
here. Respondents now seek injunctive relief in order to
avert the risk of gene flow to their crops—the very same
effect that the District Court determined to be a signifi­
cant environmental concern for purposes of NEPA. The

