Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

STEVENS, J., dissenting

for any future deregulation of RRA, and partially stayed
the vacatur to the extent it affects farmers who had al
ready planted RRA.5
Under NEPA, an agency must prepare an EIS for “every
. . . major Federal actio[n] significantly affecting the qual
ity of the human environment.” 42 U. S. C. §4332(2)(C).
Recall that the District Court had found, on the basis of
substantial evidence, that planting RRA can cause genetic
contamination of other crops, planting in controlled set
tings had led to contamination, APHIS is unable to moni
tor or enforce limitations on planting, and genetic con
tamination could decimate the American alfalfa market.
In light of that evidence, the court may well have con
cluded that any deregulation of RRA, even in a “limited
. . . geographic area” with “stringent . . . regulations gov
erning harvesting and distribution,”6 ante, at 19–20, re
——————
5 See Reply Brief for Federal Respondents 3. There is an ongoing
debate about the role of equitable adjustments in administrative law.
See, e.g., Levin, Vacation at Sea: Judicial Remedies and Equitable
Discretion in Administrative Law, 53 Duke L. J. 291 (2003). The
parties to this appeal and the majority assume that the District Court’s
remedy was crafted under its equity powers, and I will do the same.
6 One of the many matters not briefed in this case is how limited a
partial deregulation can be. It is not clear whether the sort of ex
tremely limited “partial deregulations” envisioned by the Court, see
ante, at 19–23, in which RRA is “deregulated” in one small geographic
area pursuant to stringent restrictions, could be achieved only through
“partial deregulation” actions, or whether they could also (or exclu
sively) be achieved through a more case-specific permit process. Under
the applicable regulations, a regulated article may still be used subject
to a permitting process. See 7 CFR §§340.0, 340.4 (2010). These
permits “prescribe confinement conditions and standard operating
procedures . . . to maintain confinement of the genetically engineered
organism.” Introduction of Organisms and Products Altered or Pro
duced Through Genetic Engineering, 72 Fed. Reg. 39021, 39022 (2007)
(hereinafter Introduction).
Ordinarily, “[o]nce an article has been deregulated, APHIS does not
place any restrictions or requirements on its use.” Id., at 39023. As of
2007, APHIS had never—not once—granted partial approval of a

