Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

STEVENS, J., dissenting

of Roundup-resistant weeds.” Id., at 61a–62a. In light of
the substantial record evidence of these risks, the court
would not agree to a nationwide planting scheme “without
the benefit of the development of all the relevant data,” as
well as public comment about whether contamination
could be controlled. Id., at 68a. The “partial deregulation”
proposed by petitioners, the court noted, was really “de
regulation with certain conditions,” id., at 69a—which, for
the same reasons given in the court’s earlier order, re
quires an EIS, ibid. The court pointed out numerous
problems with the APHIS-Monsanto proposal. Neither
APHIS nor Monsanto had provided “evidence that sug
gests whether, and to what extent, the proposed interim
conditions” would actually “be followed,” and comparable
conditions had failed to prevent contamination in certain
limited settings. Id., at 69a–70a. APHIS, moreover,
conceded that “it does not have the resources to inspect”
the RRA that had already been planted, and so could not
possibly be expected “to adequately monitor the more than
one million acres of [RRA] intervenors estimate [would] be
planted” under their proposal. Ibid. That was especially
problematic because any plan to limit contamination
depended on rules about harvesting, and farmers were
unlikely to follow those rules. Id., at 71a. “APHIS ha[d]
still not made any inquiry” into numerous factual concerns
raised by the court in its summary judgment order issued
several months earlier. Id., at 70a.
Next, the court rejected the plaintiffs’ proposed remedy
of “enjoin[ing] the harvesting and sale of already planted”
RRA. Id., at 76a. Although any planting or harvesting of
RRA poses a contamination risk, the court reasoned that
the equities were different for those farmers who had
already invested time and money planting RRA in good
faith reliance on APHIS’s deregulation order. And small
amounts of harvesting could be more easily monitored.
Rather than force the farmers to tear up their crops, the

