Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

petitioners have standing to seek this Court’s review.2
B
We next consider petitioners’ contention that respon­
dents lack standing to seek injunctive relief. See Daim
lerChrysler Corp. v. Cuno, 547 U. S. 332, 352 (2006) (“[A]
plaintiff must demonstrate standing separately for each
form of relief sought” (internal quotation marks omitted)).
Petitioners argue that respondents have failed to show
that any of the named respondents is likely to suffer a
constitutionally cognizable injury absent injunctive relief.
See Brief for Petitioners 40. We disagree.
Respondents include conventional alfalfa farmers.
Emphasizing “the undisputed concentration of alfalfa seed
farms,” the District Court found that those farmers had
“established a ‘reasonable probability’ that their organic
and conventional alfalfa crops will be infected with the
engineered gene” if RRA is completely deregulated. App.
to Pet. for Cert. 50a.3 A substantial risk of gene flow
——————
2 We do not rest “the primary basis for our jurisdiction on the premise
that the District Court enjoined APHIS from partially deregulating
RRA in any sense.” See post, at 7 (STEVENS, J., dissenting). Even if the
District Court’s order prohibiting a partial deregulation applies only to
“the particular partial deregulation order proposed to the court by
APHIS,” see post, at 8, petitioners would still have standing to chal­
lenge that aspect of the order.
3At least one of the respondents in this case specifically alleges that
he owns an alfalfa farm in a prominent seed-growing region and faces a
significant risk of contamination from RRA. See Record, Doc. 62, pp. 1–
2; id., ¶10, at 3–4 (Declaration of Phillip Geertson in Support of Plan­
tiffs’ Motion for Summary Judgment) (“Since alfalfa is pollinated by
honey, bumble and leafcutter bees, the genetic contamination of the
Roundup Ready seed will rapidly spread through the seed growing
regions. Bees have a range of at least two to ten miles, and the alfalfa
seed farms are much more concentrated”). Other declarations in the
record provide further support for the District Court’s conclusion that
the deregulation of RRA poses a significant risk of contamination to
respondents’ crops. See, e.g., id., Doc. 53, ¶9, at 2 (Declaration of Jim
Munsch) (alleging risk of “significant contamination . . . due to the

