Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of the Court

would, in effect, be a new deregulation decision.1
Second, petitioners in any case have standing to chal­
lenge the part of the District Court’s order enjoining par­
tial deregulation. Respondents focus their standing ar­
gument on the part of the judgment enjoining the planting
of RRA, but the judgment also states that “[b]efore grant­
ing Monsanto’s deregulation petition, even in part, the
federal defendants shall prepare an environmental impact
statement.” Id., at 108a (emphasis added); see also id., at
79a (“The Court will enter a final judgment . . . ordering
the government to prepare an EIS before it makes a deci­
sion on Monsanto’s deregulation petition”). As respon­
dents concede, that part of the judgment goes beyond the
vacatur of APHIS’s deregulation decision. See Tr. of Oral
Arg. 37, 46.
At oral argument, respondents contended that the re­
triction on APHIS’s ability to effect a partial deregulation
of RRA does not cause petitioners “an actual or an immi­
nent harm.” Id., at 39–40. In order for a partial deregula­
tion to occur, respondents argued, the case would have to
be remanded to the agency, and APHIS would have to
prepare an EA “that may or may not come out in favor of a
partial deregulation.” Id., at 39. Because petitioners
cannot prove that those two events would happen, respon­
dents contended, the asserted harm caused by the District
Court’s partial deregulation ban is too speculative to
satisfy the actual or imminent injury requirement.
We reject this argument. If the injunction were lifted,
we do not see why the District Court would have to re­
mand the matter to the agency in order for APHIS to
effect a partial deregulation. And even if a remand were
——————
1 We

need not decide whether the District Court had the authority to
replace the vacated agency order with an injunction of its own making.
The question whether petitioners are entitled to the relief that they
seek goes to the merits, not to standing.

