OCTOBER TERM, 2010

(Slip Opinion)

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

HARRINGTON, WARDEN v. RICHTER
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–587.

Argued October 12, 2010—Decided January 19, 2011

In 1994, deputies called to drug dealer Johnson’s California home found
Johnson wounded and Klein fatally wounded. Johnson claimed that
he was shot in his bedroom by respondent Richter’s codefendant,
Branscombe; that he found Klein on the living room couch; and that
his gun safe, a pistol, and cash were missing. His account was cor
roborated by evidence at the scene, including, relevant here, spent
shell casings, blood spatters, and blood pooled in the bedroom door
way. Investigators took a blood sample from a wall near the bedroom
door, but not from the blood pool. A search of Richter’s home turned
up the safe and ammunition matching evidence at the scene. After
his arrest on murder and other charges, Richter initially denied his
involvement, but later admitted disposing of Johnson’s and
Branscombe’s guns. The prosecution initially built its case on John
son’s testimony and the circumstantial evidence, but it adjusted its
approach after Richter’s counsel, in his opening statement, outlined
the theory that Branscombe shot Johnson in self-defense and that
Klein was killed in the crossfire in the bedroom doorway, and
stressed the lack of forensic support for the prosecution’s case. The
prosecution then decided to call an expert in blood pattern evidence,
who testified that it was unlikely that Klein had been shot outside
the living room and then moved to the couch, and a serologist, who
testified that the blood sample taken near the blood pool could be
Johnson’s but not Klein’s. Under cross-examination, she conceded
that she had not tested the sample for cross-contamination and that
a degraded sample would make it difficult to tell if it had blood of
Klein’s type. Defense counsel called Richter to tell his conflicting
version of events and called other witnesses to corroborate Richter’s
version. Richter was convicted and sentenced to life without parole.


2

HARRINGTON v. RICHTER
Syllabus
He later sought habeas relief from the California Supreme Court, as
serting, inter alia, that his counsel provided ineffective assistance,
see Strickland v. Washington, 466 U. S. 668, when he failed to pre
sent expert testimony on blood evidence, because it could have dis
closed the blood pool’s source and bolstered Richter’s theory. He also
offered affidavits from forensics experts to support his claim. The
court denied the petition in a one-sentence summary order. Subse
quently, he reasserted his state claims in a federal habeas petition.
The District Court denied his petition. A Ninth Circuit panel af
firmed, but the en banc court reversed. Initially it questioned
whether 28 U. S. C. §2254(d)—which, as amended by the Antiterror
ism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA), limits the
availability of federal habeas relief for claims previously “adjudicated
on the merits” in state court—applied to Richter’s petition, since the
State Supreme Court issued only a summary denial. But it found the
state-court decision unreasonable anyway. In its view, trial counsel
was deficient in failing to consult blood evidence experts in planning
a trial strategy and in preparing to rebut expert evidence the prose
cution might—and later did—offer.

Held:
1. Section 2254(d) applies to Richter’s petition, even though the
state court’s order was unaccompanied by an opinion explaining the
court’s reasoning. Pp. 7–10.
(a) By its terms, §2254(d) bars relitigation of a claim “adjudicated
on the merits” in state court unless, among other exceptions, the ear
lier state-court “decision” involved “an unreasonable application” of
“clearly established Federal law, as determined by” this Court,
§2254(d)(1). Nothing in its text—which refers only to a “decision” re
sulting “from an adjudication”—requires a statement of reasons.
Where the state-court decision has no explanation, the habeas peti
tioner must still show there was no reasonable basis for the state
court to deny relief. There is no merit to the assertion that applying
§2254(d) when state courts issue summary rulings will encourage
those courts to withhold explanations. The issuance of summary dis
positions can enable state judiciaries to concentrate resources where
most needed. Pp. 7–9.
(b) Nor is there merit to Richter’s argument that §2254(d) does
not apply because the California Supreme Court did not say it was
adjudicating his claim “on the merits.” When a state court has de
nied relief, adjudication on the merits can be presumed absent any
contrary indication or state-law procedural principles. The presump
tion may be overcome by a more likely explanation for the state
court’s decision, but Richter does not make that showing here. Pp. 9–
10.


Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
2. Richter was not entitled to the habeas relief ordered by the
Ninth Circuit. Pp. 10–24.
(a) That court failed to accord the required deference to the deci
sion of a state court adjudicating the same claims later presented in
the federal habeas petition. Its opinion shows an improper under
standing of §2254(d)’s unreasonableness standard and operation in
the context of a Strickland claim. Asking whether the state court’s
application of Strickland’s standard was unreasonable is different
from asking whether defense counsel’s performance fell below that
standard. Under AEDPA, a state court must be granted a deference
and latitude that are not in operation in a case involving direct re
view under Strickland. A state court’s determination that a claim
lacks merit precludes federal habeas relief so long as “fair-minded ju
rists could disagree” on the correctness of that decision. Yarborough
v. Alvarado, 541 U. S. 652, 664. And the more general the rule being
considered, “the more leeway courts have in reaching outcomes in
case-by-case determinations.” Ibid. The Ninth Circuit explicitly con
ducted a de novo review and found a Strickland violation; it then de
clared without further explanation that the state court’s contrary de
cision was unreasonable. But §2254(d) requires a habeas court to
determine what arguments or theories supported, or could have sup
ported, the state-court decision; and then to ask whether it is possible
fair-minded jurists could disagree that those arguments or theories
are inconsistent with a prior decision of this Court. AEDPA’s unrea
sonableness standard is not a test of the confidence of a federal ha
beas court in the conclusion it would reach as a de novo matter. Even
a strong case for relief does not make the state court’s contrary con
clusion unreasonable. Section 2254(d) is designed to confirm that
state courts are the principal forum for asserting constitutional chal
lenges to state convictions. Pp. 10–14.
(b) The Ninth Circuit erred in concluding that Richter demon
strated an unreasonable application of Strickland by the state court.
Pp. 14–23.
(1) Richter could have secured relief in state court only by
showing both that his counsel provided deficient assistance and that
prejudice resulted. To be deficient, counsel’s representation must
have fallen “below an objective standard of reasonableness,” Strick
land, 466 U. S., at 688; and there is a “strong presumption” that
counsel’s representation is within the “wide range” of reasonable pro
fessional assistance, id., at 689. The question is whether counsel
made errors so fundamental that counsel was not functioning as the
counsel guaranteed by the Sixth Amendment. Prejudice requires
demonstrating “a reasonable probability that, but for counsel’s unpro
fessional errors, the result of the proceeding would have been differ


4

HARRINGTON v. RICHTER
Syllabus
ent.” Id., at 694. “Surmounting Strickland’s high bar is never . . .
easy.” Padilla v. Kentucky, 559 U. S.___, ___. Strickland can func
tion as a way to escape rules of waiver and forfeiture. The question is
whether an attorney’s representation amounted to incompetence un
der prevailing professional norms, not whether it deviated from best
practices or most common custom. Establishing that a state court’s
application of Strickland was unreasonable under §2254(d) is even
more difficult, since both standards are “highly deferential,” 466 U. S,
at 689, and since Strickland’s general standard has a substantial
range of reasonable applications. The question under §2254(d) is not
whether counsel’s actions were reasonable, but whether there is any
reasonable argument that counsel satisfied Strickland’s deferential
standard. Pp. 14–16.
(2) The Ninth Circuit erred in holding that because Richter’s
attorney had not consulted forensic blood experts or introduced ex
pert evidence, the State Supreme Court could not reasonably have
concluded counsel provided adequate representation.
A state court could reasonably conclude that a competent attorney
could elect a strategy that did not require using blood evidence ex
perts. Rare are the situations in which the latitude counsel enjoys
will be limited to any one technique or approach. There were any
number of experts whose insight might have been useful to the de
fense. Counsel is entitled to balance limited resources in accord with
effective trial tactics and strategies. In finding otherwise the Ninth
Circuit failed to “reconstruct the circumstances of counsel’s chal
lenged conduct” and “evaluate the conduct from counsel’s perspective
at the time.” Strickland, supra, at 689. Given the many factual dif
ferences between the prosecution and defense versions of events, it
was far from evident at the time of trial that the blood source was
central to Richter’s case. And relying on “the harsh light of hind
sight” to cast doubt on a trial that took place over 15 years ago is pre
cisely what Strickland and AEDPA seek to prevent. See Bell v. Cone,
535 U. S. 685, 702. Even had the value of expert testimony been ap
parent, it would be reasonable to conclude that a competent attorney
might elect not to use it here, where counsel had reason to question
the truth of his client’s account. Making blood evidence a central is
sue could also have led the prosecution to produce its own expert
analysis, possibly destroying Richter’s case, or distracted the jury
with esoteric questions of forensic science. Defense counsel’s opening
statement may have inspired the prosecution to present forensic evi
dence, but that shows only that the defense strategy did not work out
as well as hoped. In light of the record here there was no basis to
rule that the state court’s determination was unreasonable.
The Court of Appeals erred in dismissing such concern as an inac


Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Syllabus
curate account of counsel’s actual thinking, since Strickland exam
ined only the objective reasonableness of counsel’s actions. As to
whether counsel was constitutionally deficient for not preparing ex
pert testimony as a response to the prosecution’s, an attorney may
not be faulted for a reasonable miscalculation or lack of foresight or
for failing to prepare for remote possibilities. Here, even if counsel
was mistaken, the prosecution itself did not expect to present forensic
testimony until the eve of trial. Thus, it is at least debatable whether
counsel’s error was so fundamental as to call the trial’s fairness into
doubt. Even if counsel should have foreseen the prosecution’s tactic,
Richter would still need to show it was indisputable that Strickland
required his attorney to rely on a rebuttal witness rather than on
cross-examination to discredit the witnesses, but Strickland imposes
no such requirement. And while it is possible an isolated error can
constitute ineffective assistance if it is sufficiently egregious, it is dif
ficult to establish ineffective assistance where counsel’s overall per
formance reflects active and capable advocacy. Pp. 16–22.
(3) The Ninth Circuit also erred in concluding that Richter had
established prejudice under Strickland, which asks whether it is
“reasonably likely” the verdict would have been different, 466 U. S.,
at 696, not whether a court can be certain counsel’s performance had
no effect on the outcome or that reasonable doubt might have been
established had counsel acted differently. There must be a substan
tial likelihood of a different result. The State Supreme Court could
have reasonably concluded that Richter’s prejudice evidence fell short
of this standard. His expert serology evidence established only a
theoretical possibility of Klein’s blood being in the blood pool; and at
trial, defense counsel extracted a similar concession from the prose
cution’s expert. It was also reasonable to find Richter had not estab
lished prejudice given that he offered no evidence challenging other
conclusions of the prosecution’s experts, e.g., that the blood sample
matched Johnson’s blood type. There was, furthermore, sufficient
conventional circumstantial evidence pointing to Richter’s guilt, in
cluding, e.g., the items found at his home. Pp. 22–23.
578 F. 3d 944, reversed and remanded.
KENNEDY, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA, THOMAS, BREYER, ALITO, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined.
GINSBURG, J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment. KAGAN, J.,
took no part in the consideration or decision of the case.

