(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

MAYO FOUNDATION FOR MEDICAL EDUCATION 

AND RESEARCH ET AL. v. UNITED STATES

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–837.

Argued November 8, 2010—Decided January 11, 2011

Petitioners (hereinafter Mayo) offer residency programs to doctors who
have graduated from medical school and seek additional instruction
in a chosen specialty. Those programs train doctors primarily
through hands-on experience. Although residents are required to
take part in formal educational activities, these doctors generally
spend the bulk of their time—typically 50 to 80 hours a week—caring
for patients. Mayo pays its residents annual “stipends” of over
$40,000 and also provides them with health insurance, malpractice
insurance, and paid vacation time.
The Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA) requires employ
ees and employers to pay taxes on all “wages” employees receive, 26
U. S. C. §§3101(a), 3111(a), and defines “wages” to include “all remu
neration for employment,” §3121(a). FICA defines “employment” as
“any service . . . performed . . . by an employee for the person employ
ing him,” §3121(b), but excludes from taxation any “service performed
in the employ of . . . a school, college, or university . . . if such service
is performed by a student who is enrolled and regularly attending
classes at [the school],” §3121(b)(10). Since 1951, the Treasury De
partment has construed the student exception to exempt from taxa
tion students who work for their schools “as an incident to and for the
purpose of pursuing a course of study.” 16 Fed. Reg. 12474. In 2004,
the Department issued regulations providing that “[t]he services of a
full-time employee”—which includes an employee normally scheduled
to work 40 hours or more per week—“are not incident to and for the
purpose of pursuing a course of study.” 26 CFR §31.3121(b)(10)–
2(d)(3)(iii). The Department explained that this analysis “is not af
fected by the fact that the services . . . may have an educational, in


2

MAYO FOUNDATION FOR MEDICAL ED. AND RESEARCH v.
UNITED STATES
Syllabus
structional, or training aspect.” Ibid. The rule offers as an example a
medical resident whose normal schedule requires him to perform ser
vices 40 or more hours per week, and concludes that the resident is
not a student.
Mayo filed suit asserting that this rule was invalid, and the Dis
trict Court agreed. It found the full-time employee rule inconsistent
with §3121’s unambiguous text and concluded that the factors gov
erning this Court’s analysis in National Muffler Dealers Assn., Inc. v.
United States, 440 U. S. 472, also indicated that the rule was invalid.
The Eighth Circuit reversed. Applying Chevron U. S. A. Inc. v. Natu
ral Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U. S. 837, the Court of Ap
peals concluded that the Department’s regulation was a permissible
interpretation of an ambiguous statute.

Held: The Treasury Department’s full-time employee rule is a reason
able construction of §3121(b)(10). Pp. 6–15.
(a) Under Chevron’s two-part framework, the Court first asks
whether Congress has “directly addressed the precise question at is
sue.” 467 U. S., at 842-843. Congress has not done so here; the stat
ute does not define “student” or otherwise attend to the question
whether medical residents are subject to FICA. Pp. 6–7.
(b) The parties debate whether the Court should next apply Chev
ron step two or the multi-factor analysis used to review a tax regula
tion in National Muffler. Absent a justification to do so, this Court is
not inclined to apply a less deferential framework to evaluate Treas
ury Department regulations than it uses to review rules adopted by
any other agency. The Court has “[r]ecogniz[ed] the importance of
maintaining a uniform approach to judicial review of administrative
action.” Dickinson v. Zurko, 527 U. S. 150, 154. And the principles
underlying Chevron apply with full force in the tax context. Chevron
recognized that an agency’s power “ ‘to administer a congressionally
created . . . program necessarily requires the formulation of policy
and the making of rules to fill any gap left . . . by Congress.’ ” 467
U. S., at 843. Filling gaps in the Internal Revenue Code plainly re
quires the Treasury Department to make interpretive choices for
statutory implementation at least as complex as the ones made by
other agencies in administering their statutes.
It is true that the full-time employee rule, like the rule at issue in
National Muffler, was promulgated under the Department’s general
authority to “prescribe all needful rules and regulations for the en
forcement” of the Internal Revenue Code. 26 U. S. C. §7805(a). It is
also true that this Court, in opinions predating Chevron, stated that
it owed less deference to a rule adopted under that general grant of
authority than it would afford rules issued pursuant to more specific
grants. See Rowan Cos. v. United States, 452 U. S. 247, 253; United


Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
States v. Vogel Fertilizer Co., 455 U. S. 16, 24. Since then, however,
the Court has found Chevron deference appropriate “when it appears
that Congress delegated authority to the agency generally to make
rules carrying the force of law, and that the agency interpretation
claiming deference was promulgated in the exercise of that author
ity.” United States v. Mead Corp., 533 U. S. 218, 226–227. Chevron
and Mead provide the appropriate framework for evaluating the full
time employee rule. The Department issued the rule pursuant to an
explicit authorization to prescribe needful rules and regulations, and
only after notice-and-comment procedures. The Court has recognized
these to be good indicators of a rule meriting Chevron deference,
Mead, 533 U. S., at 229–231. Pp. 7–12.
(c) The rule easily satisfies Chevron’s second step. Mayo accepts
the Treasury Department’s determination that an individual may not
qualify for the student exception unless the educational aspect of his
relationship with his employer predominates over the service aspect
of that relationship, but objects to the Department’s conclusion that
residents working more than 40 hours per week categorically cannot
satisfy that requirement. Mayo argues that the Treasury Depart
ment should be required to engage in a case-by-case inquiry into
what each employee does and why he does it, and that the Depart
ment has arbitrarily distinguished between hands-on training and
classroom instruction. But regulation, like legislation, often requires
drawing lines. The Department reasonably sought to distinguish be
tween workers who study and students who work. Focusing on the
hours spent working and those spent in studies is a sensible way to
accomplish that goal. The Department thus has drawn a distinction
between education and service, not between classroom instruction
and hands-on training. The Treasury Department also reasonably
concluded that its full-time employee rule would “improve adminis
trability,” 69 Fed. Reg. 76405, and thereby “has avoided the wasteful
litigation and continuing uncertainty that would inevitably accom
pany [a] case-by-case approach” like the one Mayo advocates, United
States v. Correll, 389 U. S. 299, 302. Moreover, the rule reasonably
takes into account the Social Security Administration’s concern that
exempting residents from FICA would deprive them and their fami
lies of vital social security disability and survivorship benefits.
Pp. 12–15.
568 F. 3d 675, affirmed.
ROBERTS, C. J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which all other
Members joined, except KAGAN, J., who took no part in the considera
tion or decision of the case.

