Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

1

KENNEDY, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

Nos. 09–1454 and 09–1478
_________________

BOB CAMRETA, PETITIONER
09–1454
v.
SARAH GREENE, PERSONALLY AND AS NEXT FRIEND OF
S. G., A MINOR, AND K. G., A MINOR
JAMES ALFORD, DEPUTY SHERIFF, DESCHUTES
COUNTY, OREGON, PETITIONER
09–1478
v.
SARAH GREENE, PERSONALLY AND AS NEXT FRIEND OF
S. G., A MINOR, AND K. G., A MINOR
ON WRITS OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
APPEALS FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
[May 26, 2011]

JUSTICE KENNEDY, with whom JUSTICE THOMAS joins,
dissenting.
Today’s decision results from what is emerging as a
rather troubling consequence from the reasoning of our
recent qualified immunity cases. The Court is correct to
note the problem presented when, on the one hand, its
precedents permit or invite courts to rule on the merits of
a constitutional claim even when qualified immunity
disposes of the matter; and, on the other hand, jurisdic
tional principles prevent us from reviewing those invited
rulings. It does seem that clarification is required. In my
view, however, the correct solution is not to override juris
dictional rules that are basic to the functioning of the
Court and to the necessity of avoiding advisory opinions.
Dictum, though not precedent, may have its utility; but it
ought not to be treated as a judgment standing on its own.


2

CAMRETA v. GREENE
KENNEDY, J., dissenting

So, while acknowledging the problem the Court confronts,
my concern with the rule adopted for this case calls for
this respectful dissent.
I
The Court acknowledges our “settled refusal to enter
tain an appeal,” including a petition for certiorari, “by a
party on an issue as to which he prevailed.” Ante, at 8
(internal quotation marks omitted). At the outset, how
ever, it is important to state this rule more fully to show
its foundational character. A party that has already ob
tained the judgment it requested may not seek review to
challenge the reasoning of a judicial decision. As we have
said on many occasions, “This Court reviews judgments,
not statements in opinions.” California v. Rooney, 483
U. S. 307, 311 (1987) (per curiam) (internal quotation
marks omitted); see also Chevron U. S. A. Inc. v. Natural
Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U. S. 837, 842, and
n. 8 (1984) (collecting cases). The rule has been noted and
followed since the early years of this Court. “The question
before an appellate Court is, was the judgment correct, not
the ground on which the judgment professes to proceed.”
McClung v. Silliman, 6 Wheat. 598, 603 (1821).
The rule against hearing appeals or accepting petitions
for certiorari by prevailing parties is related to the Article
III prohibition against issuing advisory opinions. This
principle underlies, for example, the settled rule against
hearing cases involving a disputed judgment based on
grounds of state law. As Justice Jackson explained for the
Court: “[O]ur power is to correct wrong judgments, not to
revise opinions. We are not permitted to render an advi
sory opinion, and if the same judgment would be rendered
by the state court after we corrected its views of federal
laws, our review could amount to nothing more than an
advisory opinion.” Herb v. Pitcairn, 324 U. S. 117, 125–
126 (1945). This point has been repeated with force and


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

KENNEDY, J., dissenting

clarity. See, e.g., Michigan v. Long, 463 U. S. 1032, 1041–
1042 (1983). The “ ‘judicial Power’ is one to render dis
positive judgments,” not advisory opinions. Plaut v.
Spendthrift Farm, Inc., 514 U. S. 211, 219 (1995) (internal
quotation marks omitted).
The rule against hearing appeals by prevailing parties
applies in countless situations, many involving govern
ment parties. Deficient performance may not yield preju
dice under Strickland v. Washington, 466 U. S. 668 (1984).
A defective warrant may be entitled to good-faith reliance
under United States v. Leon, 468 U. S. 897 (1984). An
unreasonable search may be cured through the inevitable
discovery doctrine of Nix v. Williams, 467 U. S. 431 (1984).
In these and myriad other situations, an error is identi
fied, but that conclusion does not affect the ultimate
judgment entered. In all these contexts, it is established
that the prevailing party may not appeal. This conclusion
holds true even though a statement on the merits can
have adverse consequences for the prevailing party. “The
Court of Appeal’s use of analysis that may have been
adverse to the State’s long-term interests does not allow
the State to claim status as a losing party for purposes of
this Court’s review.” Rooney, supra, at 311.
The Court nonetheless holds that defendants who pre
vail in the Courts of Appeals based on qualified immunity
may still obtain review in this Court. This point is put in
perspective by the fact that the Court today, in an alto
gether unprecedented disposition, says that it vacates not
a judgment but rather “part of the Ninth Circuit’s opin
ion.” Ante, at 2. The Court’s conclusion is unsettling in its
implications. Even on the Court’s reading of our cases, the
almost invariable rule is that prevailing parties are not
permitted to obtain a writ of certiorari. Cf. Kalka v.
Hawk, 215 F. 3d 90, 96, n. 9 (CADC 2000) (concluding that
the Supreme Court “has apparently never granted the
certiorari petition of a party who prevailed in the appel


4

CAMRETA v. GREENE
KENNEDY, J., dissenting

late court”). After today, however, it will be common for
prevailing parties to seek certiorari based on the Court’s
newfound exception. And that will be so even though the
“admonition” against reviewing mere statements in opin
ions “has special force when the statements raise consti
tutional questions, for it is our settled practice to avoid
the unnecessary decision of such issues.” FCC v. Pacifica
Foundation, 438 U. S. 726, 734 (1978).
The Court defends its holding with citations to just two
of our cases. Ante, at 6. Neither provides support for the
Court’s result.
The first case is Electrical Fittings Corp. v. Thomas &
Betts Co., 307 U. S. 241 (1939). There, a plaintiff alleged
the infringement of two patent claims. The District Court
found the plaintiff’s first claim valid but not infringed and
the second claim invalid. Rather than issuing a judgment
“dismissing the bill without more,” the District Court
instead “entered a decree adjudging claim 1 valid” and
“dismissing the bill for failure to prove infringement.” Id.,
at 241–242. The District Court thus issued a formal judg
ment regarding the validity of the first claim. The defen
dant appealed to dispute that claim’s validity. This Court
noted, without qualification, that a party “may not appeal
from a judgment or decree in his favor, for the purpose of
obtaining a review of findings he deems erroneous which
are not necessary to support the decree.” Id., at 242.
“But,” this Court went on to explain, “here the decree itself
purports to adjudge the validity of claim 1, and though
the adjudication was immaterial to the disposition of the
cause, it stands as an adjudication of one of the issues
litigated.” Ibid. In other words, the District Court had
entered an unnecessary legal conclusion into the terms of
the judgment itself, making it possible, for example, that
the decree would have estoppel effect as to an issue whose
resolution was unnecessary to the proper judgment of
dismissal. Electrical Fittings therefore concluded that


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

KENNEDY, J., dissenting

“the petitioners were entitled to have this portion of the
decree eliminated.” Ibid. The sole relief provided was
an order for the “reformation of the decree.” Ibid. That
result accords with, indeed flows from, the settled rule
that this Court reviews only judgments, not statements in
opinions.
The second case is Deposit Guaranty Nat. Bank v.
Roper, 445 U. S. 326 (1980). In that case plaintiffs at
tempted to bring a class action against a bank. After the
District Court denied class certification, the defendant
tendered to the plaintiffs the maximum value that they
could recover as individuals. Of course, that offer did
not amount to “all that ha[d] been requested in the
complaint”—namely, “relief for the class.” Id., at 341
(Rehnquist, J., concurring). It is therefore no surprise
that the plaintiffs responded with “a counteroffer of judg
ment in which they attempted to reserve the right to
appeal the adverse class certification ruling.” Id., at 329
(opinion of the Court). But that proposal was denied.
“Based on the bank’s offer, the District Court entered
judgment in respondents’ favor, over their objection.” Id.,
at 330. The District Court thus issued a judgment other
than the one the plaintiffs had sought. The would-be class
plaintiffs appealed, and this Court later granted certiorari.
The Court held that appeal was not barred by the prevailing
party rule: “We view the denial of class certification as
an example of a procedural ruling, collateral to the merits
of a litigation, that is appealable after the entry of final
judgment.” Id., at 336. As the Court explained, the plain
tiffs had obtained only a judgment in their individual
capacities. Yet the plaintiffs had “asserted as their per
sonal stake in the appeal their desire to shift to successful
class litigants a portion of those fees and expenses that
have been incurred in this litigation.” Id., at 334, n. 6; see
also id., at 336. Because the purported prevailing parties
were injured by their failure to obtain the class-based


6

CAMRETA v. GREENE
KENNEDY, J., dissenting

judgment they had sought, the Court held there was “ju
risdiction to entertain the appeal only to review the as
serted procedural error, not for the purpose of passing on
the merits.” Ibid. The Court was clear that the District
Court’s denial of class certification had a direct effect on
the judgment: “As in Electrical Fittings,” the purported
prevailing parties “were entitled to have [a] portion of the
District Court’s judgment reviewed.” Ibid.
Neither Electrical Fittings nor Deposit Guaranty pro
vides support for the rule adopted today. Those decisions
instead held that, in the unusual circumstances presented,
particular parties who at first appeared to have prevailed
below had in fact failed to obtain the judgments they had
sought. This Court therefore had jurisdiction, including of
course jurisdiction under Article III, to provide relief for
the harm caused by the adverse judgments entered below.
The parties seeking appeal in Electrical Fittings and
Deposit Guaranty might be compared with plaintiffs who
have requested $1,000 in relief but obtained only $500.
Such parties have prevailed in part, but have not “re
ceive[d] all that [they] ha[d] sought.” Deposit Guaranty,
supra, at 333. In contrast the Court appears to assume
that the petitioners in the present case are true prevailing
parties. They have obtained from the Court of Appeals the
only formal judgment they requested: denial of respon
dent’s claim for damages.
The Court points to policy concerns as the basis for its
willingness to hear appeals by prevailing parties. Ante, at
8–10. But those concerns are unwarranted. In only one
dissenting opinion has it been suggested that certiorari
should be granted to reach a merits determination “locked
inside” a favorable qualified immunity ruling. Bunting v.
Mellen, 541 U. S. 1019, 1024 (2004) (SCALIA, J., dissenting
from denial of certiorari). That dissenting opinion was
issued in response to the rule that constitutional issues
should be decided in every case involving qualified immu


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

KENNEDY, J., dissenting

nity. Id., at 1025. Yet that mandated rule of decision has
now been disapproved, so the dissent’s argument is no
longer applicable. See Pearson v. Callahan, 555 U. S. 223
(2009). Indeed, the Court today suggests that it still
would not allow review of the merits even in the case that
provoked the dissent. Unlike petitioner Camreta, the
petitioner in Bunting had left the Government’s employ
before filing a petition for certiorari and so lacked stand
ing to obtain review in this Court. Compare 541 U. S., at
1025, n., with id., at 1021 (Stevens, J., respecting denial of
certiorari), and ante, at 14–15, and n. 9.
The instant case thus appears to be the first in which
the Court’s new exception to the prevailing party rule
might have been applied. And even here that exception is
neither necessary nor sufficient for the merits to be adju
dicated by this Court. The Fourth Amendment question
decided below is bound to arise again in future cases.
Indeed, the reasoning of the decision below implicates a
number of decisions in other Courts of Appeals. Cf. 588
F. 3d 1011, 1026, n. 11 (CA9 2009) (collecting cases). Yet
today’s decision does not supply the Courts of Appeals
with guidance as to these merits issues. The Court in
stead vacates part of the reasoning of the decision below,
thereby leaving other decisions intact and unreviewed.
The Court thus resolves difficult constitutional issues and
provides an unprecedented answer to “an important ques
tion of judicial policy,” all to no end. Ante, at 7.
The Court errs in reading Electrical Fittings and Deposit
Guaranty to permit review and, indeed, the provision of
relief disconnected from any judgment. The result is an
erroneous and unbounded exception to an essential princi
ple of judicial restraint. Parties who have obtained all
requested relief may not seek review here.
II
As today’s decision illustrates, our recent qualified im


8

CAMRETA v. GREENE
KENNEDY, J., dissenting

munity cases tend to produce decisions that are in ten
sion with conventional principles of case-or-controversy
adjudication. This Court has given the Courts of Appeals
“permission” to find constitutional violations when order
ing dismissal or summary judgment based on qualified
immunity. Ante, at 9; see Pearson, supra. This invitation,
as the Court is correct to note, was intended to produce
binding constitutional holdings on the merits. Ante, at
10–11. The goal was to make dictum precedent, in order
to hasten the gradual process of constitutional interpreta
tion and alter the behavior of government defendants.
Ibid. The present case brings the difficulties of that objec
tive into perspective. In express reliance on the permis
sion granted in Pearson, the Court of Appeals went out of
its way to announce what may be an erroneous interpreta
tion of the Constitution; and, under our case law, the
Ninth Circuit must give that dictum legal effect as prece
dent in future cases.
In this way unnecessary merits decisions in qualified
immunity cases could come to resemble declaratory judg
ments or injunctions. Indeed the United States as amicus
curiae contends that the merits decision below “has an
effect similar to an injunction or a declaratory judgment
against the government as a whole.” Brief for United
States as Amicus Curiae 13. Today’s opinion adopts that
view, providing as relief the vacatur of “part of the Ninth
Circuit’s opinion”—namely, the part of the opinion that
rules on the constitutional merits. Ante, at 2. For the first
time, obiter dictum is treated not just as precedent for
future cases but as a judgment in its own right.
The Court of Appeals in this case did not in fact issue a
declaratory judgment or injunction embodying a determi
nation on the merits, and it does not appear that a judg
ment of that kind could have issued. Plaintiffs must
establish standing as to each form of relief they request,
yet the plaintiff in this case had no separate interest in


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

KENNEDY, J., dissenting

obtaining a declaratory judgment. See Los Angeles v.
Lyons, 461 U. S. 95, 103–105 (1983) (citing Ashcroft v.
Mattis, 431 U. S. 171 (1977) (per curiam); Golden v. Zwick
ler, 394 U. S. 103 (1969)); see also MedImmune, Inc. v.
Genentech, Inc., 549 U. S. 118, 127 (2007). There was no
likelihood that S. G., the plaintiff’s daughter, would again
be subjected to interrogation while at school, much less
that she would be interrogated by petitioner-defendant
Camreta, so S. G. would seem to have had no greater
stake in obtaining a declaratory judgment than the plain
tiff in Lyons had in obtaining an injunction. See 461 U. S.,
at 104 (noting the “actual controversy that must exist for a
declaratory judgment to be entered”). Our qualified im
munity cases should not permit plaintiffs in constitutional
cases to make an end-run around established principles of
justiciability. In treating dictum as though it were a
declaratory judgment or an injunction, the Court appears
to approve the issuance of such judgments outside the
bounds of Article III jurisdiction.
The Court creates an exception to the prevailing party
rule in order to solve the difficulties created by our quali
fied immunity jurisprudence, but the Court’s solution
creates new problems. Sometimes defendants in qualified
immunity cases have no particular interest in disputing
the constitutional merits. Acknowledging as much, the
Court notes that petitioner Alford no longer works for the
government and so “has lost his interest in the Fourth
Amendment ruling.” Ante, at 14, n. 9. In concluding that
Alford lacks Article III standing, the Court suggests that
it would lack jurisdiction to review and perhaps even to
vacate the merits decision of the Court of Appeals if re
spondent had sued only Alford. Ibid.; cf. Arizonans for
Official English v. Arizona, 520 U. S. 43, 72–73 (1997)
(discussing standing to obtain review in this Court as well
as this Court’s jurisdiction to vacate judgments issued
without jurisdiction). That suggestion is disconcerting.


10

CAMRETA v. GREENE
KENNEDY, J., dissenting

Under today’s decision, it appears that the Court’s ability
to review merits determinations in qualified immunity
cases is contingent on the defendant who has been sued.
A defendant who has left the government’s employ or
otherwise lacks an interest in disputing the merits will
be unable to obtain further review. See ante, at 14, n. 9
(discussing Article III limits on relief in this Court); ante,
at 17, n. 10 (discussing limitations on this Court’s equita
ble vacatur authority).
The Court today avoids this difficulty by concluding that
petitioner Camreta has suffered an Article III injury.
Ante, at 7; cf. ante, at 15, n. 9 (“[W]e do not decide any
questions that would arise if [Alford] were the only defen
dant”). But the Court can reach that conclusion only
because, “as part of his job,” Camreta “regularly engages”
in conduct made unlawful by the reasoning of the Court of
Appeals. Ante, at 7. As discussed below, this conclusion is
doubtful. See infra, at 11–13. In any event the Court’s
standing analysis will be inapplicable in most qualified
immunity cases. Cf. ante, at 6 (asserting that the “Article
III standard often will be met”). When an officer is sued
for taking an extraordinary action, such as using excessive
force during a high-speed car chase, there is little possibil
ity that a constitutional decision on the merits will again
influence that officer’s conduct. The officer, like petitioner
Alford or the petitioner in Bunting, would have no interest
in litigating the merits in the Court of Appeals and, under
the Court’s rule, would seem unable to obtain review of a
merits ruling by petitioning for certiorari. See ante, at 5–
7; ante, at 14, n. 9, ante, at 17, n. 10; see also Lyons, supra,
at 103–105. This problem will arise with great frequency
in qualified immunity cases. Once again, the decision
today allows plaintiffs to obtain binding constitutional
determinations on the merits that lie beyond this Court’s
jurisdiction to review. The Court thus fails to solve the
problem it identifies.


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

KENNEDY, J., dissenting

III
It is most doubtful that Article III permits appeals by
any officer to whom the reasoning of a judicial decision
might be applied in a later suit. Yet that appears to be
the implication of the Court’s holding. The favorable judg
ment of the Court of Appeals did not in itself cause peti
tioner Camreta to suffer an Article III injury entitling him
to appeal. Cf. supra, at 1–7 (discussing Electrical Fittings
and Deposit Guaranty); ASARCO Inc. v. Kadish, 490 U. S.
605, 619 (1989) (finding an Article III controversy where
petitioner challenged “a final judgment altering tangible
legal rights”). On the contrary, Camreta has been injured
by the decision below to no greater extent than have hun
dreds of other government officers who might argue that
they too have been affected by the unnecessary statements
made by the Court of Appeals. The Court notes as a limit
on its authority to entertain appeals from prevailing par
ties certain statutory directives, directives that can be
interpreted or shaped to allow expanded powers of review.
Ante, at 4. But even if Congress were to give explicit
permission for certiorari petitions to be filed by “any per
son” instead of by “any party,” 28 U. S. C. §1254(1), the
constitutional definition of a case or controversy would
still constrain this Court’s jurisdiction.
The Court’s analysis appears to rest on the premise that
the reasoning of the decision below in itself causes Cam
reta injury. Until today, however, precedential reasoning
of general applicability divorced from a particular adverse
judgment was not thought to yield “standing to appeal.”
Parr v. United States, 351 U. S. 513, 516, 517 (1956) (opin
ion for the Court by Harlan, J.). That is why “[o]nly one
injured by the judgment sought to be reviewed can ap
peal.” Id., at 516; see also supra, at 1–6; e.g., Chathas v.
Local 134 IBEW, 233 F. 3d 508, 512 (CA7 2000) (Posner,
J.) (“Adverse dicta are not appealable rulings. They can
cause harm, but not the sort of harm that the courts . . .


12

CAMRETA v. GREENE
KENNEDY, J., dissenting

deem to create a genuine controversy within the meaning
of Article III of the Constitution. Judgments are appeal
able; opinions are not” (citations omitted)); Sea-Land
Serv., Inc. v. Department of Transp., 137 F. 3d 640, 648
(CADC 1998) (Williams, J.) (“[M]ere precedential effect
within an agency is not, alone, enough to create Article III
standing, no matter how foreseeable the future litigation”
(citing Radiofone, Inc. v. FCC, 759 F. 2d 936, 938 (CADC
1985) (opinion of Scalia, J.))); id., at 939 (explaining that
standing must “arise from the particular activity which
the agency adjudication has approved . . . and not from the
mere precedential effect of the agency’s rationale in later
adjudications”); Oxford Shipping Co., v. New Hampshire
Trading Corp., 697 F. 2d 1, 7 (CA1 1982) (Breyer, J.)
(“Since the judgment appealed from was in [a party’s]
favor, and since the statement made was in no sense
necessary to that judgment, the statement was dictum.
There is no known basis for an appeal from a dictum”). It
is revealing that the Court creates an exception to the
prevailing party rule while making clear that the Courts
of Appeals are not to follow suit, in any context. See ante,
at 13–14.
The conclusion that precedent of general applicability
cannot in itself create standing to sue or appeal flows from
basic principles. Camreta’s asserted injury is caused not
by the Court of Appeals or by respondent but rather by
“the independent action of some third party not before the
court”—that is, by the still-unidentified private plaintiffs
whose lawsuits Camreta hopes to avoid. Lujan v. Defend
ers of Wildlife, 504 U. S. 555, 560–561 (1992) (internal
quotation marks omitted).
This circumstance distin
guishes the present case from requests for declaratory or
injunctive relief filed against officeholders who threaten
legal enforcement. An inert rule of law does not cause
particular, concrete injury; only the specific threat of its
enforcement can do so. That is why the proper defendant


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

KENNEDY, J., dissenting

in a suit for prospective relief is the party prepared to
enforce the relevant legal rule against the plaintiff. See
MedImmune, Inc., 549 U. S., at 127 (explaining that de
claratory relief requires a controversy “between parties
having adverse legal interests, of sufficient immediacy and
reality” (internal quotation marks omitted)); Babbitt v.
Farm Workers, 442 U. S. 289, 298–299 (1979) (“A plaintiff
who challenges a statute must demonstrate a realistic
danger of sustaining a direct injury as a result of the
statute’s operation or enforcement”). Without an adverse
judgment from which to appeal, Camreta has in effect filed
a new declaratory judgment action in this Court against
the Court of Appeals. This is no more consistent with
Article III than filing a declaratory judgment action
against this Court for its issuance of an adverse precedent
or against Congress in response to its enactment of an
unconstitutional law.
IV
If today’s decision proves to be more than an isolated
anomaly, the Court might find it necessary to reconsider
its special permission that the Courts of Appeals may
issue unnecessary merits determinations in qualified im
munity cases with binding precedential effect.
Other dynamics permit the law of the Constitution to be
elaborated within the conventional framework of a case or
controversy. “[T]he development of constitutional law is
by no means entirely dependent on cases in which the
defendant may seek qualified immunity.” Pearson, 555
U. S., at 242–243. For example, qualified immunity does
not bar Fourth and Fifth Amendment suppression chal
lenges. See, e.g., Kentucky v. King, ante, p. ___. Nor does
it prevent invocation of the Constitution as a defense
against criminal prosecution, civil suit, or cruel and un
usual punishment. See, e.g., Snyder v. Phelps, 562 U. S.
___ (2011); Graham v. Florida, 560 U. S. ___ (2010); Law


14

CAMRETA v. GREENE
KENNEDY, J., dissenting

rence v. Texas, 539 U. S. 558 (2003). Nor is qualified
immunity available in constitutional suits against munici
palities—as this very case illustrates. Ante, at 15–16.
Our cases make clear, moreover, that “officials can still be
on notice that their conduct violates established law even
in novel factual circumstances.” Hope v. Pelzer, 536 U. S.
730, 741 (2002). That rule permits clearly established
violations to be found when extreme though unheard-of
actions violate the Constitution. See, e.g., ibid. Further
more, constitutional plaintiffs may seek declaratory or
injunctive relief pursuant to standard principles of justi
ciability. Those plaintiffs do not need Pearson’s special
rule.
See, e.g., Citizens United v. Federal Election
Comm’n, 558 U. S. ___ (2010); McDonald v. Chicago, 561
U. S. ___ (2010). In any event, some incremental advance
in the law occurs even when clearly established violations
are found. It is an inevitable aspect of judicial decision
making that the resolution of one legal question or factual
dispute casts light on the next.
It would be preferable at least to explore refinements to
our qualified immunity jurisprudence before altering basic
principles of jurisdiction. For instance, the objectives of
qualified immunity might be satisfied if there were no bar
to reaching the merits and issuing judgment when re
quested damages are nominal and substantial attorney’s
fees are waived or not allowed. Cf. Farrar v. Hobby, 506
U. S. 103, 112–115 (1992) (discussing unavailability of
attorney’s fees where nominal damages are only relief);
Hewitt v. Helms, 482 U. S. 755, 761–763 (1987); Harlow
v. Fitzgerald, 457 U. S. 800, 819, n. 34 (1982); Carey v.
Piphus, 435 U. S. 247, 266 (1978) (discussing the propriety
of providing nominal damages as relief).
The desire to resolve more constitutional questions
ought not lead to altering our jurisdictional rules. That is
the precise object that our legal tradition tells us we
should resist. Haste to resolve constitutional issues has


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

KENNEDY, J., dissenting

never been thought advisable. We instead have encour
aged the Courts of Appeals to follow “that older, wiser
judicial counsel not to pass on questions of constitutional
ity . . . unless such adjudication is unavoidable.” Scott v.
Harris, 550 U. S. 372, 388 (2007) (BREYER, J., concurring)
(internal quotation marks omitted); see generally Ash
wander v. TVA, 297 U. S. 288, 347 (1936) (Brandeis, J.,
concurring). Experience teaches that there is no persua
sive reason to reverse normal principles of judicial review
in qualified immunity cases. Compare, e.g., Pearson,
supra, at 236, and Siegert v. Gilley, 500 U. S. 226, 235
(1991) (KENNEDY, J., concurring in judgment) (“[I]t seems
to reverse the usual ordering of issues to tell the trial and
appellate courts that they should resolve the constitu
tional question first”), with id., at 232 (opinion of the
Court), and Saucier v. Katz, 533 U. S. 194, 201 (2001). Yet
this Court’s “puzzling misadventure in constitutional
dictum” still has not come to an end. Leval, Judging
Under the Constitution: Dicta About Dicta, 81 N. Y. U.
L. Rev. 1249, 1275 (2006).
There will be instances where courts discuss the merits
in qualified immunity cases. It is sometimes a better
analytic approach and a preferred allocation of judicial
time and resources to dismiss a claim on the merits rather
than to dismiss based on qualified immunity. And “[i]t
often may be difficult to decide whether a right is clearly
established without deciding precisely what the existing
constitutional right happens to be.” Pearson, supra, at 236
(internal quotation marks omitted). This Court should not
superintend the judicial decisionmaking process in quali
fied immunity cases under special rules, lest it make the
judicial process more complex for civil rights suits than for
other litigation. It follows, however, that the Court should
provide no special permission to reach the merits. If
qualified immunity cases were treated like other cases
raising constitutional questions, settled principles of con


16

CAMRETA v. GREENE
KENNEDY, J., dissenting

stitutional avoidance would apply. So would conventional rules regarding dictum and holding. Judicial obser
vations made in the course of explaining a case might give
important instruction and be relevant when assessing a
later claim of qualified immunity. Cf. Wilkinson v. Rus
sell, 182 F. 3d 89, 112, and n. 3 (CA2 1999) (Calabresi, J.,
concurring). But as dicta those remarks would not estab
lish law and would not qualify as binding precedent. See
Seminole Tribe of Fla. v. Florida, 517 U. S. 44, 67 (1996).
*
*
*
The distance our qualified immunity jurisprudence has
taken us from foundational principles is made all the more
apparent by today’s decision. The Court must construe
two of its precedents in so broad a manner that they are
taken out of their proper and logical confines. To vacate
the reasoning of the decision below, the Court accepts that
obiter dictum is not just binding precedent but a judgment
susceptible to plenary review. I would dismiss this case
and note that our jurisdictional rule against hearing ap
peals by prevailing parties precludes petitioners’ attempt
to obtain review of judicial reasoning disconnected from a
judgment.

