Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

1

Opinion of the Court
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Wash
ington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

Nos. 09–1454 and 09–1478
_________________

BOB CAMRETA, PETITIONER
09–1454
v.
SARAH GREENE, PERSONALLY AND AS NEXT FRIEND OF
S. G., A MINOR, AND K. G., A MINOR
JAMES ALFORD, DEPUTY SHERIFF, DESCHUTES
COUNTY, OREGON, PETITIONER
09–1478
v.
SARAH GREENE, PERSONALLY AND AS NEXT FRIEND OF
S. G., A MINOR, AND K. G., A MINOR
ON WRITS OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
APPEALS FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
[May 26, 2011]

JUSTICE KAGAN delivered the opinion of the Court.
Almost a decade ago, a state child protective services
worker and a county deputy sheriff interviewed a girl at
her elementary school in Oregon about allegations that
her father had sexually abused her. The girl’s mother
subsequently sued the government officials on the child’s
behalf for damages under Rev. Stat. §1979, 42 U. S. C.
§1983, claiming that the interview infringed the Fourth
Amendment. The United States Court of Appeals for the
Ninth Circuit agreed, ruling that the officials had violated
the Constitution by failing to obtain a warrant to conduct
the interview. But the Court of Appeals further held that
qualified immunity shielded the officials from monetary


2

CAMRETA v. GREENE
Opinion of the Court

liability because the constitutional right at issue was not
clearly established under existing law.
The two officials sought this Court’s review of the Ninth
Circuit’s ruling on the Fourth Amendment. We granted
their petitions to examine two questions. First, may gov
ernment officials who prevail on grounds of qualified im
munity obtain our review of a court of appeals’ decision
that their conduct violated the Constitution? And second,
if we may consider cases in this procedural posture, did
the Ninth Circuit correctly determine that this interview
breached the Fourth Amendment?
We conclude that this Court generally may review a
lower court’s constitutional ruling at the behest of a gov
ernment official granted immunity. But we may not do so
in this case for reasons peculiar to it. The case has become
moot because the child has grown up and moved across
the country, and so will never again be subject to the
Oregon in-school interviewing practices whose constitu
tionality is at issue. We therefore do not reach the Fourth
Amendment question in this case. In line with our normal
practice when mootness frustrates a party’s right to ap
peal, see United States v. Munsingwear, Inc., 340 U. S. 36,
39 (1950), we vacate the part of the Ninth Circuit’s opinion
that decided the Fourth Amendment issue.
I
In February 2003, police arrested Nimrod Greene for
suspected sexual abuse of a young boy unrelated to him.
During the investigation of that offense, the boy’s parents
told police that they suspected Greene of molesting his 9
year-old daughter S. G. The police reported this informa
tion to the Oregon Department of Human Services, which
assigned petitioner Bob Camreta, a child protective ser
vices caseworker, to assess S. G.’s safety. Several days
later, Camreta, accompanied by petitioner James Alford, a
Deschutes County deputy sheriff, went to S. G.’s elemen


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Opinion of the Court

tary school and interviewed her about the allegations. Cam
reta and Alford did not have a warrant, nor had they
obtained parental consent to conduct the interview. Al
though S. G. at first denied that her father had molested
her, she eventually stated that she had been abused.
Greene was indicted and stood trial for sexually abusing
S. G., but the jury failed to reach a verdict and the charges
were later dismissed.
Respondent Sarah Greene, S. G.’s mother, subsequently
sued Camreta and Alford on S. G.’s behalf 1 for damages
under 42 U. S. C. §1983, which authorizes suits against
state officials for violations of constitutional rights. S. G.
alleged that the officials’ in-school interview had breached
the Fourth Amendment’s proscription on unreasonable
seizures.2
The District Court granted summary judgment to Cam
reta and Alford, and the Ninth Circuit affirmed. The
Court of Appeals first ruled that the interview violated
S. G.’s rights because Camreta and Alford had “seize[d]
and interrogate[d] S. G. in the absence of a warrant, a
court order, exigent circumstances, or parental consent.”
588 F. 3d 1011, 1030 (2009) (footnote omitted). But the
court further held that the officials were entitled to quali
fied immunity from damages liability because no clearly
established law had warned them of the illegality of their
conduct. Id., at 1031–1033.
The Ninth Circuit explained why it had chosen to rule
on the merits of the constitutional claim, rather than
merely hold that the officials were immune from suit. By
addressing the legality of the interview, the court said, it
——————
1 Because Greene filed suit as next friend for her minor daughter, we
will refer to respondent as S. G. throughout this opinion.
2 S. G. also sued Deschutes County, alleging that it has a policy of
unconstitutionally seizing children in public schools. See 588 F. 3d
1011, 1020, n. 4 (CA9 2009). The District Court rejected this claim, and
S. G. did not appeal that ruling to the Ninth Circuit. Ibid.


4

CAMRETA v. GREENE
Opinion of the Court

could “provide guidance to those charged with the difficult
task of protecting child welfare within the confines of
the Fourth Amendment.” Id., at 1022. That guidance came
in no uncertain terms: “[G]overnment officials investigat
ing allegations of child abuse,” the court warned, “should
cease operating on the assumption that a ‘special need’
automatically justifies dispensing with traditional Fourth
Amendment protections in this context.” Id., at 1033.
Although the judgment entered was in their favor,
Camreta and Alford petitioned this Court to review the
Ninth Circuit’s ruling that their conduct violated the
Fourth Amendment. S. G. declined to cross-petition for
review of the decision that the officials have immunity.
We granted certiorari. 562 U. S. ___ (2010).
II
We first consider our ability to act on a petition brought
by government officials who have won final judgment on
grounds of qualified immunity, but who object to an appel
late court’s ruling that they violated the plaintiff’s consti
tutional rights. Camreta and Alford are, without doubt,
prevailing parties. The Ninth Circuit’s decision shielded
them from monetary liability, and S. G. chose not to con
test that ruling. So whatever else follows, they will not
have to pay S. G. the damages she sought. The question
we confront is whether we may nonetheless review the
Court of Appeals’ holding that the officials violated the
Constitution.
The statute governing this Court’s jurisdiction author
izes us to adjudicate a case in this posture, and S. G. does
not contend otherwise. The relevant provision confers
unqualified power on this Court to grant certiorari “upon
the petition of any party.” 28 U. S. C. §1254(1) (emphasis
added). That language covers petitions brought by liti
gants who have prevailed, as well as those who have
lost, in the court below. See E. Gressman, K. Geller, S.


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of the Court

Shapiro, T. Bishop, & E. Hartnett, Supreme Court Prac
tice 87 (9th ed. 2007) (hereinafter Stern & Gressman).
S. G., however, alleges two impediments to our exercise
of statutory authority here, one constitutional and the
other prudential. First, she claims that Article III bars
review because petitions submitted by immunized officials
present no case or controversy. See Brief for Respondent
31–39. Second, she argues that our settled practice of
declining to hear appeals by prevailing parties should
apply with full force when officials have obtained immu
nity. See id., at 24–27. We disagree on both counts.
A
Article III of the Constitution grants this Court author
ity to adjudicate legal disputes only in the context of
“Cases” or “Controversies.” To enforce this limitation,
we demand that litigants demonstrate a “personal stake”
in the suit. Summers v. Earth Island Institute, 555 U. S.
488, ___ (2009) (slip op., at 4) (internal quotation marks
omitted); see also United States Parole Comm’n v. Ger
aghty, 445 U. S. 388, 395–397 (1980). The party invoking
the Court’s authority has such a stake when three condi
tions are satisfied: The petitioner must show that he has
“suffered an injury in fact” that is caused by “the conduct
complained of” and that “will be redressed by a favorable
decision.” Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U. S. 555,
560–561 (1992) (internal quotation marks omitted). And
the opposing party also must have an ongoing interest
in the dispute, so that the case features “that concrete ad
verseness which sharpens the presentation of issues.” Los
Angeles v. Lyons, 461 U. S. 95, 101 (1983) (internal quota
tion marks omitted). To ensure a case remains “fit for
federal-court adjudication,” the parties must have the
necessary stake not only at the outset of litigation, but
throughout its course. Arizonans for Official English v.
Arizona, 520 U. S. 43, 67 (1997).


6

CAMRETA v. GREENE
Opinion of the Court

We have previously recognized that an appeal brought
by a prevailing party may satisfy Article III’s case-or
controversy requirement. See Deposit Guaranty Nat.
Bank v. Roper, 445 U. S. 326, 332–336 (1980). Indeed, we
have twice before allowed a party for whom judgment was
entered to challenge an unfavorable lower court ruling.
See ibid.; Electrical Fittings Corp. v. Thomas & Betts Co.,
307 U. S. 241 (1939).3 In that context as in others, we
stated, the critical question under Article III is whether
the litigant retains the necessary personal stake in the
appeal. Deposit Guaranty, 445 U. S., at 334. As we will
explain, a court will usually invoke rules of “federal appel
late practice” to decline review of a prevailing party’s
challenge even when he has the requisite stake. Id., at
333; see infra, at 8. But in such a case, Article III is not
what poses the bar; these rules of practice “d[o] not have
[their] source in the jurisdictional limitations” of the Con
stitution. Deposit Guaranty, 445 U. S., at 333–334. So
long as the litigants possess the personal stake discussed
above, an appeal presents a case or controversy, no matter
that the appealing party was the prevailing party below.
This Article III standard often will be met when immu
nized officials seek to challenge a ruling that their conduct
violated the Constitution. That is not because a court has
made a retrospective judgment about the lawfulness of the
officials’ behavior, for that judgment is unaccompanied by
any personal liability. Rather, it is because the judgment
may have prospective effect on the parties. The court in
——————
3 The

dissent discusses Deposit Guaranty and Electrical Fittings at
length in an effort to distinguish them from this suit. See post, at 4–7
(opinion of KENNEDY, J.). But we do not say those cases are foursquare
with this one on their facts; we rely on them only for the proposition
that this Court has previously identified no special Article III bar on
review of appeals brought by parties who obtained a judgment in their
favor below. The dissent does not, because it cannot, dispute that
simple point.


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of the Court

such a case says: “Although this official is immune from
damages today, what he did violates the Constitution and
he or anyone else who does that thing again will be per
sonally liable.” If the official regularly engages in that
conduct as part of his job (as Camreta does), he suffers
injury caused by the adverse constitutional ruling. So
long as it continues in effect, he must either change the
way he performs his duties or risk a meritorious damages
action. Cf. id., at 337–338 (discussing prevailing party’s
stake in a ruling’s prospective effects). Only by overturn
ing the ruling on appeal can the official gain clearance to
engage in the conduct in the future. He thus can demon
strate, as we demand, injury, causation, and redressabil
ity.4 And conversely, if the person who initially brought
the suit may again be subject to the challenged conduct,
she has a stake in preserving the court’s holding. See Erie
v. Pap’s A. M., 529 U. S. 277, 287–289 (2000); Honig v.
Doe, 484 U. S. 305, 318–323 (1988); cf. Lyons, 461 U. S., at
111 (examining whether the plaintiff had shown “a suffi
cient likelihood that he will again be wronged in a similar
way”). Only if the ruling remains good law will she have
ongoing protection from the practice.
We therefore reject S. G.’s view that Article III bars
us from adjudicating any and all challenges brought by
government officials who have received immunity below.
That the victor has filed the appeal does not deprive us
of jurisdiction. The parties in such cases may yet have
a sufficient “interest in the outcome of [a litigated] issue”
to present a case or controversy. Deposit Guaranty, 445
U. S., at 336, n. 7.
——————
4 Contrary

to the dissent’s view, see post, at 12, the injury to the offi
cial thus occurs independent of any future suit brought by a third
party. Indeed, no such suit is likely to arise because the prospect of
damages liability will force the official to change his conduct.


8

CAMRETA v. GREENE
Opinion of the Court

B
Article III aside, an important question of judicial policy
remains. As a matter of practice and prudence, we have
generally declined to consider cases at the request of a
prevailing party, even when the Constitution allowed us to
do so. See, e.g., Gunn v. University Comm. to End War in
Viet Nam, 399 U. S. 383, 390, n. 5 (1970); New York Tele
phone Co. v. Maltbie, 291 U. S. 645, 646 (1934) (per cu
riam); see also Bunting v. Mellen, 541 U. S. 1019, 1023
(2004) (SCALIA, J., dissenting from denial of certiorari)
(“[O]ur practice reflects a ‘settled refusal’ to entertain an
appeal by a party on an issue as to which he prevailed”
(quoting Stern & Gressman 79 (8th ed. 2002))). Our
resources are not well spent superintending each word
a lower court utters en route to a final judgment in the
petitioning party’s favor. See California v. Rooney, 483
U. S. 307, 311 (1987) (per curiam) (“[T]hat the Court of
Appeal reached its decision through analysis different
than this Court might have used does not make it appro
priate . . . for the prevailing party to request us to review
it”). We therefore have adhered with some rigor to the
principle that “[t]his Court reviews judgments, not state
ments in opinions.” Ibid. (internal quotation marks omit
ted). On the few occasions when we have departed from
that principle, we have pointed to a “policy reaso[n] . . . of
sufficient importance to allow an appeal” by the winner
below. Deposit Guaranty, 445 U. S., at 336, n. 7.
We think just such a reason places qualified immunity
cases in a special category when it comes to this Court’s
review of appeals brought by winners. The constitutional
determinations that prevailing parties ask us to consider
in these cases are not mere dicta or “statements in opin
ions.” Rooney, 483 U. S., at 311 (internal quotation marks
omitted); see Bunting, 541 U. S., at 1023 (SCALIA, J.,
dissenting from denial of certiorari) (stating that such a
determination is “not mere dictum in the ordinary sense”).


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of the Court

They are rulings that have a significant future effect on
the conduct of public officials—both the prevailing parties
and their co-workers—and the policies of the government
units to which they belong. See supra, at 6–7. And more:
they are rulings self-consciously designed to produce this
effect, by establishing controlling law and preventing
invocations of immunity in later cases. And still more:
they are rulings designed this way with this Court’s
permission, to promote clarity—and observance—of consti
tutional rules. We describe in more detail below these fea
tures of the qualified immunity world and why they came
to be. We hold that taken together, they support bending
our usual rule to permit consideration of immunized offi
cials’ petitions.
To begin, then, with the nature of these suits: Under
§1983 (invoked in this case) and Bivens v. Six Unknown
Fed. Narcotics Agents, 403 U. S. 388 (1971), a plaintiff
may seek money damages from government officials who
have violated her constitutional or statutory rights. But to
ensure that fear of liability will not “unduly inhibit offi
cials in the discharge of their duties,” Anderson v. Creigh
ton, 483 U. S. 635, 638 (1987), the officials may claim
qualified immunity; so long as they have not violated a
“clearly established” right, they are shielded from personal
liability, Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 U. S. 800, 818 (1982).
That means a court can often avoid ruling on the plain
tiff’s claim that a particular right exists. If prior case law
has not clearly settled the right, and so given officials fair
notice of it, the court can simply dismiss the claim for
money damages. The court need never decide whether the
plaintiff’s claim, even though novel or otherwise unsettled,
in fact has merit.
And indeed, our usual adjudicatory rules suggest that
a court should forbear resolving this issue. After all, a
“longstanding principle of judicial restraint requires that
courts avoid reaching constitutional questions in advance


10

CAMRETA v. GREENE
Opinion of the Court

of the necessity of deciding them.” Lyng v. Northwest
Indian Cemetery Protective Assn., 485 U. S. 439, 445
(1988); see also Ashwander v. TVA, 297 U. S. 288, 346–347
(1936) (Brandeis, J., concurring). In this category of quali
fied immunity cases, a court can enter judgment without
ever ruling on the (perhaps difficult) constitutional claim
the plaintiff has raised. Small wonder, then, that a court
might leave that issue for another day.
But we have long recognized that this day may never
come—that our regular policy of avoidance sometimes
does not fit the qualified immunity situation because it
threatens to leave standards of official conduct perma
nently in limbo. County of Sacramento v. Lewis, 523 U. S.
833, 841, n. 5 (1998). Consider a plausible but unsettled
constitutional claim asserted against a government official
in a suit for money damages. The court does not resolve
the claim because the official has immunity. He thus
persists in the challenged practice; he knows that he can
avoid liability in any future damages action, because the
law has still not been clearly established. Another plain
tiff brings suit, and another court both awards immunity
and bypasses the claim. And again, and again, and again.
So the moment of decision does not arrive.5 Courts fail to
clarify uncertain questions, fail to address novel claims,
fail to give guidance to officials about how to comply with
legal requirements. See, e.g., ibid.; Wilson v. Layne, 526
U. S. 603, 609 (1999). Qualified immunity thus may frus
——————
5 The constitutional issue could arise in a case in which qualified
immunity is unavailable—for example, “in a suit to enjoin future con
duct, in an action against a municipality, or in litigating a suppres
sion motion in a criminal proceeding.” Lewis, 523 U. S., at 841, n. 5. A
decision in such a case would break the repetitive cycle of qualified
immunity defenses described above. But some kinds of constitutional
questions do not often come up in these alternative settings. Pearson v.
Callahan, 555 U. S. 223, 236 (2009); see Lewis, 523 U. S., at 841, n. 5
(noting that “these avenues w[ill] not necessarily be open”).


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

Opinion of the Court

trate “the development of constitutional precedent” and
the promotion of law-abiding behavior. Pearson v. Calla
han, 555 U. S. 223, 237 (2009).
For this reason, we have permitted lower courts to avoid
avoidance—that is, to determine whether a right exists
before examining whether it was clearly established. See,
e.g., ibid.; Lewis, 523 U. S., at 841, n. 5. Indeed, for some
time we required courts considering qualified immunity
claims to first address the constitutional question, so as to
promote “the law’s elaboration from case to case.” Saucier
v. Katz, 533 U. S. 194, 201 (2001). More recently, we have
left this matter to the discretion of lower courts, and in
deed detailed a range of circumstances in which courts
should address only the immunity question. See Pearson,
555 U. S., at 236–242. In general, courts should think
hard, and then think hard again, before turning small
cases into large ones. But it remains true that following
the two-step sequence—defining constitutional rights and
only then conferring immunity—is sometimes beneficial
to clarify the legal standards governing public officials.
Id., at 236; see id., at 236–242 (discussing factors courts
should consider in making this determination).
Here, the Court of Appeals followed exactly this two
step process, for exactly the reasons we have said may in
select circumstances make it “advantageous.” Id., at 242.
The court, as noted earlier, explained that it was “ad
dress[ing] both prongs of the qualified immunity inquiry
. . . to provide guidance to those charged with the difficult
task of protecting child welfare within the confines of the
Fourth Amendment.” 588 F. 3d, at 1022. To that end, the
court adopted constitutional standards to govern all in
school interviews of suspected child abuse victims. See
id., at 1030. And the court specifically instructed govern
ment officials to follow those standards going forward—to
“cease operating on the assumption” that warrantless
interviews are permitted. See id., at 1033. With the law


12

CAMRETA v. GREENE
Opinion of the Court

thus clearly established, officials who conduct this kind of
interview will not receive immunity in the Ninth Circuit.
And the State of Oregon has done just what we would
expect in the wake of the court’s decision: It has provided
revised legal advice, consonant with the Ninth Circuit’s
ruling, to child protective services workers wishing to
interview children in schools. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 14. The
court thus accomplished what it set out to do: settle a
question of constitutional law and thereby guide the con
duct of officials.
Given its purpose and effect, such a decision is review
able in this Court at the behest of an immunized official.
No mere dictum, a constitutional ruling preparatory to a
grant of immunity creates law that governs the official’s
behavior. If our usual rule pertaining to prevailing parties
applied, the official would “fac[e] an unenviable choice”:
He must either acquiesce in a ruling he had no opportu
nity to contest in this Court, or “defy the views of the
lower court, adhere to practices that have been declared
illegal, and thus invite new suits and potential punitive
damages.” Pearson, 555 U. S., at 240–241 (internal quota
tion marks and brackets omitted). And if our usual bar on
review applied, it would undermine the very purpose
served by the two-step process, “which is to clarify consti
tutional rights without undue delay.” Bunting, 541 U. S.,
at 1024 (SCALIA, J., dissenting from denial of certiorari).
This Court, needless to say, also plays a role in clarifying
rights. Just as that purpose may justify an appellate court
in reaching beyond an immunity defense to decide a con
stitutional issue, so too that purpose may support this
Court in reviewing the correctness of the lower court’s
decision.6
——————
6 The dissent complains that our decision “allows plaintiffs to obtain
binding constitutional determinations on the merits that lie beyond this
Court’s jurisdiction to review.” Post, at 10. But that is not the case. It


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

Opinion of the Court

We emphasize, however, two limits of today’s holding.
First, it addresses only our own authority to review cases
in this procedural posture. The Ninth Circuit had no oc
casion to consider whether it could hear an appeal from
an immunized official: In that court, after all, S. G. ap
pealed the judgment in the officials’ favor. We therefore
need not and do not decide if an appellate court, too, can
entertain an appeal from a party who has prevailed on
immunity grounds.7 Second, our holding concerns only
what this Court may review; what we actually will choose
to review is a different matter. That choice will be gov
erned by the ordinary principles informing our decision
whether to grant certiorari—a “power [we] . . . sparingly
exercis[e].” Forsyth v. Hammond, 166 U. S. 506, 514
(1897); see also id., at 514–515 (this Court grants review
“only when the circumstances of the case satisfy us that
the importance of the question involved, the necessity of
avoiding conflict [in the lower courts], or some matter
affecting the interests of this nation . . . , demands such
——————
is not this decision but our prior precedents that allow lower courts to
issue “binding constitutional determinations” in qualified immunity
cases even when the plaintiff is not entitled to money damages. And it
is not our decision but the dissent that would insulate these rulings
from this Court’s power to review.
7 We note, however, that the considerations persuading us to permit
review of petitions in this posture may not have the same force as
applied to a district court decision. “A decision of a federal district
court judge is not binding precedent in either a different judicial
district, the same judicial district, or even upon the same judge in
a different case.”
18 J. Moore et al., Moore’s Federal Practice
§134.02[1][d], p. 134–26 (3d ed. 2011). Many Courts of Appeals there
fore decline to consider district court precedent when determining if
constitutional rights are clearly established for purposes of qualified
immunity. See, e.g., Kalka v. Hawk, 215 F. 3d 90, 100 (CADC 2000)
(Tatel, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment) (collecting
cases). Otherwise said, district court decisions—unlike those from the
courts of appeals—do not necessarily settle constitutional standards or
prevent repeated claims of qualified immunity.


14

CAMRETA v. GREENE
Opinion of the Court

exercise”); this Court’s Rule 10. Our decision today does
no more than exempt one special category of cases from
our usual rule against considering prevailing parties’
petitions. Going forward, we will consider these petitions
one by one in accord with our usual standards.
III
Although we reject S. G.’s arguments for dismissing this
case at the threshold, we find that a separate jurisdic
tional problem requires that result: This case, we con
clude, is moot.8
As we explained above, supra, at 6–7, in a dispute of
this kind, both the plaintiff and the defendant ordinarily
retain a stake in the outcome. That is true of one defen
dant here: Camreta remains employed as a child protec
tive services worker, so he has an interest in challenging
the Ninth Circuit’s ruling requiring him to obtain a war
rant before conducting an in-school interview.9 But S. G.
——————
8 JUSTICE

SOTOMAYOR maintains that, because this case is moot,
“[t]here is no warrant for reaching th[e] question” whether immunized
officials may obtain our consideration of an adverse constitutional
ruling. Post, at 1 (opinion concurring in judgment). But this Court has
never held that it may consider only one threshold issue per case. And
here, as we will explain, infra, at 16–18, and n. 10, our discussion of
reviewability is critical to our ultimate disposition of this suit. More
over, that issue was fully litigated in this Court. We granted certiorari
to consider whether “the Ninth Circuit’s constitutional ruling [is]
reviewable, notwithstanding that [the Court of Appeals] ruled in [the
officials’] favor on qualified immunity grounds.” Pet. for Cert. in No.
09–1454, p. i. And all the parties, as well as the United States as
amicus curiae, addressed that question in their briefs and oral argu
ments. Compare Brief for Petitioner in No. 09–1454, pp. 41–44, Brief
for Petitioner in No. 09–1478, p. 4, n. 1, Reply Brief for Petitioner in
No. 09–1454, pp. 3–13, Reply Brief for Petitioner in No. 09–1478, pp. 5–
6, Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 11–20, and Tr. of Oral Arg.
4–14, 17–24, 54–58, with Brief for Respondent 24–42, and Tr. of Oral
Arg. 27–31, 46–52.
9 The same cannot be said for Deputy Sheriff Alford. In their briefs,
the parties informed us that Alford no longer works for Deschutes


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

Opinion of the Court

can no longer claim the plaintiff’s usual stake in preserv
ing the court’s holding because she is no longer in need
of any protection from the challenged practice. After we
granted certiorari, we discovered that S. G. has “moved to
Florida, and ha[s] no intention of relocating back to Ore
gon.” Brief for Respondent 13, n. 13. What is more, S. G.
is now only months away from her 18th birthday—and,
presumably, from her high school graduation. See id.,
at 31. S. G. therefore cannot be affected by the Court of
Appeals’ ruling; she faces not the slightest possibility of
being seized in a school in the Ninth Circuit’s jurisdiction
as part of a child abuse investigation. When “subsequent
events ma[ke] it absolutely clear that the allegedly wrong
ful behavior could not reasonably be expected to recur,” we
have no live controversy to review. United States v. Con
centrated Phosphate Export Assn., Inc., 393 U. S. 199, 203
(1968); see, e.g., Atherton Mills v. Johnston, 259 U. S. 13,
15–16 (1922) (suit contesting the validity of a child labor
statute mooted when plaintiff-child was “[no longer]
within the ages affected by the act”); DeFunis v. Ode
gaard, 416 U. S. 312 (1974) (per curiam) (suit challenging
law school admissions policy mooted when plaintiff neared
graduation). Time and distance combined have stymied
our ability to consider this petition.
Camreta makes only one counterargument: He avers
that S. G. has a continuing interest in the Ninth Circuit’s
constitutional ruling because it may help her establish a
——————
County or in law enforcement. See Brief for Respondent 1, n. 2; Reply
Brief for Petitioner in No. 09–1478. Because Alford will not again
participate in a child abuse investigation, he has lost his interest in the
Fourth Amendment ruling. See supra, at 6–7; cf. Arizonans for Official
English v. Arizona, 520 U. S. 43, 67 (1997) (holding that the plaintiff’s
challenge to a state law affecting the performance of her job duties was
mooted when she left state employment). But in light of Camreta’s
continuing stake, Alford’s altered circumstances are immaterial to our
resolution of this dispute, and we do not decide any questions that
would arise if he were the only defendant.


16

CAMRETA v. GREENE
Opinion of the Court

municipal liability claim against Deschutes County. See
Tr. of Oral Arg. 7; id., at 8. S. G.’s initial complaint
charged that the county has an official policy of unconsti
tutionally subjecting schoolchildren to police interrogation.
See n. 2, supra. Finding no evidence of such a policy (even
assuming that an unlawful seizure had occurred in this
case), the District Court granted summary judgment to
the county, App. to Pet. for Cert. in No. 09–1454, pp. 66–
67, and S. G. did not appeal that ruling, 588 F. 3d, at
1020, n. 4. And although S. G. recently sought to reinstate
her claim against the county, the District Court denied
that motion. 6:05–cv–06047–AA, Docket Entry No. 139 (D
Ore., Jan. 4, 2011). Whatever interest S. G. might have
were her municipal liability claim still pending (an issue
we need not and do not decide), we do not think S. G.’s
dismissed claim against a different defendant involving a
separate legal theory can save this case from mootness.
See Commodity Futures Trading Comm’n v. Board of
Trade of Chicago, 701 F. 2d 653, 656 (CA7 1983) (Posner,
J.) (“[O]ne can never be certain that findings made in a
decision concluding one lawsuit will not some day . . .
control the outcome of another suit. But if that were
enough to avoid mootness, no case would ever be moot”).
We thus must decide how to dispose of this case. When
a civil suit becomes moot pending appeal, we have the
authority to “direct the entry of such appropriate judg
ment, decree, or order, or require such further proceedings
to be had as may be just under the circumstances.” 28
U. S. C. §2106. Our “established” (though not excep
tionless) practice in this situation is to vacate the judg
ment below. See Munsingwear, 340 U. S., at 39; Alvarez v.
Smith, 558 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (slip op., at 6). “A party
who seeks review of the merits of an adverse ruling, but
is frustrated by the vagaries of circumstance,” we have
emphasized, “ought not in fairness be forced to acquiesce
in” that ruling. U. S. Bancorp Mortgage Co. v. Bonner


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

Opinion of the Court

Mall Partnership, 513 U. S. 18, 25 (1994). The equitable
remedy of vacatur ensures that “those who have been
prevented from obtaining the review to which they are
entitled [are] not . . . treated as if there had been a re
view.” Munsingwear, 340 U. S., at 39.10
S. G. contends that vacatur is inappropriate in the
qualified immunity context because that disposition would
“undermine” the Court of Appeals’ choice to “decide [a]
constitutional questio[n]” to govern future cases. Brief for
Respondent 41–42; Tr. of Oral Arg. 47. Far from counsel
ing against vacatur, S. G.’s argument reveals the necessity
of that procedural course. The point of vacatur is to pre
vent an unreviewable decision “from spawning any legal
consequences,” so that no party is harmed by what we
have called a “preliminary” adjudication. Munsingwear,
340 U. S., at 40–41. As we have just explained, a consti
——————
10 Our analysis of the proper disposition of this case follows from our
conclusion that government officials who secure a favorable judgment
on immunity grounds may obtain our review of an adverse constitu
tional holding. See supra, at 12. As just noted, Munsingwear justified
vacatur to protect a litigant who had the right to appeal but lost that
opportunity due to happenstance. 340 U. S., at 39, 41. We have there
fore left lower court decisions intact when mootness did not deprive the
appealing party of any review to which he was entitled. See, e.g., U. S.
Bancorp Mortgage Co., 513 U. S., at 25 (holding that the appealing
party had “surrender[ed] his claim to the equitable remedy of vacatur”
by settling the case and thus “voluntarily forfeit[ing] his legal remedy
by the ordinary processes of appeal”); Karcher v. May, 484 U. S. 72, 83
(1987) (holding that vacatur in light of mootness was not warranted
when the losing party declined to file an appeal). So if immunized
officials could not challenge an appellate decision in this Court, we
would choose not to exercise our equitable authority to vacate that
decision, even if the case later became moot. But here, as we have just
explained, the theory that underlies our prior cases applying Munsing
wear is satisfied: Vacatur expunges an adverse decision that would be
reviewable had this case not become moot. See Arizonans, 520 U. S., at
74 (finding vacatur proper because, “when the mooting event occurred,”
the Arizona Attorney General was pursuing his “right to present
argument on appeal”).


18

CAMRETA v. GREENE
Opinion of the Court

tutional ruling in a qualified immunity case is a legally
consequential decision; that is the very reason we think it
appropriate for review even at the behest of a prevailing
party. See supra, at 8–12. When happenstance prevents
that review from occurring, the normal rule should ap
ply: Vacatur then rightly “strips the decision below of its
binding effect,” Deakins v. Monaghan, 484 U. S. 193,
200 (1988), and “clears the path for future relitigation,”
Munsingwear, 340 U. S., at 40.
In this case, the happenstance of S. G.’s moving across
country and becoming an adult has deprived Camreta of
his appeal rights. Mootness has frustrated his ability to
challenge the Court of Appeals’ ruling that he must obtain
a warrant before interviewing a suspected child abuse
victim at school. We therefore vacate the part of the Ninth
Circuit’s opinion that addressed that issue, and remand
for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.11 See,
e.g., Arave v. Hoffman, 552 U. S. 117, 118–119 (2008) (per
curiam); Selig v. Pediatric Specialty Care, Inc., 551 U. S.
1142 (2007).
It is so ordered.
——————
11 Our disposition of this case differs slightly from the normal
Munsingwear order vacating the lower court’s judgment and remanding
the case with instructions to dismiss the relevant claim. We leave
untouched the Court of Appeals’ ruling on qualified immunity and its
corresponding dismissal of S. G.’s claim because S. G. chose not to
challenge that ruling. We vacate the Ninth Circuit’s ruling addressing
the merits of the Fourth Amendment issue because, as we have ex
plained, supra, at 11–12, that is the part of the decision that mootness
prevents us from reviewing but that has prospective effects on Cam
reta. See Walling v. James V. Reuter, Inc., 321 U. S. 671, 677 (1944)
(observing that when a suit becomes moot, “this Court . . . may make
such disposition of the whole case as justice may require”). But we
emphasize that this unique disposition follows from the unique posture
of this case and signals no endorsement of deviations from the usual
Munsingwear order in other situations.

