8

BOBBY v. VAN HOOK
Per Curiam

should have prompted them to interview other family
members—his stepsister, two uncles, and two aunts—as
well as a psychiatrist who once treated his mother, all of
whom “could have helped his counsel narrate the true
story of Van Hook’s childhood experiences.” 560 F. 3d, at
528. But there comes a point at which evidence from more
distant relatives can reasonably be expected to be only
cumulative, and the search for it distractive from more
important duties. The ABA Standards prevailing at the
time called for Van Hook’s counsel to cover several broad
categories of mitigating evidence, see 1 ABA Standards
4–4.1, comment., at 4–55, which they did. And given all
the evidence they unearthed from those closest to Van
Hook’s upbringing and the experts who reviewed his his
tory, it was not unreasonable for his counsel not to identify
and interview every other living family member or every
therapist who once treated his parents. This is not a case
in which the defendant’s attorneys failed to act while
potentially powerful mitigating evidence stared them in
the face, cf. Wiggins, 539 U. S., at 525, or would have been
apparent from documents any reasonable attorney would
have obtained, cf. Rompilla v. Beard, 545 U. S. 374, 389–
393 (2005). It is instead a case, like Strickland itself, in
which defense counsel’s “decision not to seek more” miti
gating evidence from the defendant’s background “than
was already in hand” fell “well within the range of profes
sionally reasonable judgments.” 466 U. S., at 699.3
——————
3 In addition to the evidence the Sixth Circuit said his attorneys over
looked, Van Hook alleges that his lawyers failed to provide the expert
witnesses with a “complete set of relevant records or [his] complete
psycho-social history.” Brief in Opposition 4. But he offers no support
for that assertion. He further claims that his counsel failed to obtain or
present records of his military service and prior hospitalizations, but
the record shows that they did review the former, see App. to Pet. for
Cert. 380a, and that the trial court learned (from one of the written
expert reports) all the relevant information Van Hook says it would
have gleaned from the latter, see id., at 373a–377a.

