4

BOBBY v. VAN HOOK
Per Curiam

on ABA guidelines announced 18 years after Van Hook
went to trial. See 560 F. 3d, at 526–528 (quoting ABA
Guidelines for the Appointment and Performance of De
fense Counsel in Death Penalty Cases 10.7, comment., pp.
81–83 (rev. ed. 2003)). The ABA standards in effect in
1985 described defense counsel’s duty to investigate both
the merits and mitigating circumstances in general terms:
“It is the duty of the lawyer to conduct a prompt investiga
tion of the circumstances of the case and to explore all
avenues leading to facts relevant to the merits of the case
and the penalty in the event of conviction.” 1 ABA Stan
dards for Criminal Justice 4–4.1, p. 4–53 (2d ed. 1980).
The accompanying two-page commentary noted that de
fense counsel have “a substantial and important role to
perform in raising mitigating factors,” and that
“[i]nformation concerning the defendant’s background,
education, employment record, mental and emotional
stability, family relationships, and the like, will be rele
vant, as will mitigating circumstances surrounding the
commission of the offense itself.” Id., at 4–55.
Quite different are the ABA’s 131-page “Guidelines” for
capital defense counsel, published in 2003, on which the
Sixth Circuit relied. Those directives expanded what had
been (in the 1980 Standards) a broad outline of defense
counsel’s duties in all criminal cases into detailed pre
scriptions for legal representation of capital defendants.
They discuss the duty to investigate mitigating evidence
in exhaustive detail, specifying what attorneys should look
for, where to look, and when to begin. See ABA Guidelines
10.7, comment., at 80–85. They include, for example, the
requirement that counsel’s investigation cover every pe
riod of the defendant’s life from “the moment of concep
tion,” id., at 81, and that counsel contact “virtually every
one . . . who knew [the defendant] and his family” and
obtain records “concerning not only the client, but also his
parents, grandparents, siblings, and children,” id., at 83.

