Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2009)

9

Per Curiam

What is more, even if Van Hook’s counsel performed
deficiently by failing to dig deeper, he suffered no preju
dice as a result. See id., at 694. As the Ohio court that
rejected Van Hook’s state habeas petition found, the affi
davits submitted by the witnesses not interviewed shows
their testimony would have added nothing of value. See
State v. Van Hook, No. C–910505, 1992 WL 308350, *2.
Only two witnesses even arguably would have added new,
relevant information: One of Van Hook’s uncles noted that
Van Hook’s mother was temporarily committed to a psy
chiatric hospital, and Van Hook’s stepsister mentioned
that his father hit Van Hook frequently and tried to kill
Van Hook’s mother. App. to Pet. for Cert. 227a, 232a. But
the trial court had already heard—from Van Hook’s
mother herself—that she had been “under psychiatric
care” more than once. Id., at 340a. And it was already
aware that his father had a violent nature, had attacked
Van Hook’s mother, and had beaten Van Hook at least
once. See also id., at 305a (noting that Van Hook “suffered
from a significant degree of neglect and abuse” throughout
his “chaotic” childhood). Neither the Court of Appeals nor
Van Hook has shown why the minor additional details the
trial court did not hear would have made any difference.
On the other side of the scales, moreover, was the evi
dence of the aggravating circumstance the trial court
found: that Van Hook committed the murder alone in the
course of an aggravated robbery. See Ohio Rev. Code Ann.
§2929.04(A)(7) (Lexis 2006). Van Hook’s confession made
clear, and he never subsequently denied, both that he was
the sole perpetrator of the crime and that “[h]is intention
from beginning to end was to rob [Self] at some point in
their evening’s activities.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 295a; see
id., at 276a–278a, 294a. Nor did he arrive at that inten
tion on a whim: Van Hook had previously pursued the
same strategy—of luring homosexual men into secluded
settings to rob them—many times since his teenage years,

