6

BOBBY v. VAN HOOK
Per Curiam

wrong.
Like the Court of Appeals, Van Hook first contends that
his attorneys began their mitigation investigation too late,
waiting until he was found guilty—only days before the
sentencing hearing—to dig into his background. See 560
F. 3d, at 528. But the record shows they started much
sooner. Between Van Hook’s indictment and his trial less
than three months later, they contacted their lay wit
nesses early and often: They spoke nine times with his
mother (beginning within a week after the indictment),
once with both parents together, twice with an aunt who
lived with the family and often cared for Van Hook as a
child, and three times with a family friend whom Van
Hook visited immediately after the crime. App. to Pet. for
Cert. 380a–383a, 384a–387a. As for their expert wit
nesses, they were in touch with one more than a month
before trial, and they met with the other for two hours a
week before the trial court reached its verdict. Id., at
382a, 386a. Moreover, after reviewing his military his
tory, they met with a representative of the Veterans Ad
ministration seven weeks before trial and attempted to
obtain his medical records. Id., at 381a, 386a. And they
looked into enlisting a mitigation specialist when the trial
was still five weeks away. Id., at 386a. The Sixth Circuit,
in short, was simply incorrect in saying Van Hook’s law
yers waited until the “last minute.” 560 F. 3d, at 528. Cf.
Williams v. Taylor, 529 U. S. 362, 395 (2000) (counsel
waited “until a week before the trial” to prepare for the
sentencing phase).
Nor was the scope of counsel’s investigation unreason
able.2 The Sixth Circuit said Van Hook’s attorneys found
——————
2 In his brief in this Court, Van Hook also alludes to his counsel’s
failure to obtain an independent mental-health expert and their reli
ance on (and failure to object to harmful evidence in) a presentence
investigation report—grounds on which the Sixth Circuit panel previ
ously relied but which it abandoned in its final opinion. See supra, at

