(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

ASHCROFT v. AL-KIDD
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–98. Argued March 2, 2011—Decided May 31, 2011
Respondent al-Kidd alleges that, after the September 11th terrorist
attacks, then-Attorney General Ashcroft authorized federal officials
to detain terrorism suspects using the federal material-witness stat
ute, 18 U. S. C. §3144. He claims that this pretextual detention pol
icy led to his material-witness arrest as he was boarding a plane to
Saudi Arabia. To secure the warrant, federal officials had told a
Magistrate Judge that information “crucial” to Sami Omar alHussayen’s prosecution would be lost if al-Kidd boarded his flight.
Prosecutors never called al-Kidd as a witness, and (as he alleges)
never meant to do so. Al-Kidd filed suit pursuant to Bivens v. Six
Unknown Fed. Narcotics Agents, 403 U. S. 388, challenging the con
stitutionality of Ashcroft’s alleged policy. The District Court denied
Ashcroft’s motion to dismiss on absolute and qualified immunity
grounds. The Ninth Circuit affirmed, holding that the Fourth
Amendment prohibits pretextual arrests absent probable cause of
criminal wrongdoing, and that Ashcroft could not claim qualified or
absolute immunity.
Held:
1. The objectively reasonable arrest and detention of a material
witness pursuant to a validly obtained warrant cannot be challenged
as unconstitutional on the basis of allegations that the arresting au
thority had an improper motive. Pp. 3–9.
(a) Qualified immunity shields a government official from money
damages unless (1) the official violated a statutory or constitutional
right, and (2) that right was “clearly established” at the time of the
challenged conduct. Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 U. S. 800, 818.
Where, as here, a court considers both prongs of this inquiry, this


2

ASHCROFT v. AL-KIDD
Syllabus
Court has the discretion to correct the lower court’s errors at each
step. P. 3.
(b) Whether a detention is reasonable under the Fourth Amend
ment “is predominantly an objective inquiry.” Indianapolis v. Ed
mond, 531 U. S. 32, 47. Courts ask whether “the circumstances,
viewed objectively, justify [the challenged] action.” Scott v. United
States, 436 U. S. 128, 138. Except for cases that involve special
needs, e.g., Vernonia School Dist. 47J v. Acton, 515 U. S. 646, 653, or
administrative searches, e.g., Michigan v. Clifford, 464 U. S. 287,
294, this Court has almost uniformly rejected invitations to probe
subjective intent. The Court of Appeals was mistaken in believing
that Edmond established that “ ‘programmatic purpose’ is relevant to
Fourth Amendment analysis of programs of seizures without prob
able cause.” 580 F. 3d 949, 968. It was not the absence of probable
cause that triggered Edmond’s invalidating-purpose inquiry, but the
checkpoints’ failure to be based on “individualized suspicion.” 531
U. S., at 47. Here a neutral Magistrate Judge issued a warrant au
thorizing al-Kidd’s arrest, and the affidavit accompanying the war
rant application gave individualized reasons to believe that he was a
material witness who would soon disappear. A warrant based on in
dividualized suspicion grants more protection than existed in most of
this Court’s cases eschewing inquiries into intent, e.g., Whren v.
United States, 517 U. S. 806, 813, and Terry v. Ohio, 392 U. S. 1, 21–
22. Al-Kidd’s contrary, narrow reading of those cases is rejected. Be
cause he concedes that individualized suspicion supported the issu
ance of the material-witness arrest warrant; and does not assert that
his arrest would have been unconstitutional absent the alleged pre
text; there is no Fourth Amendment violation here. Pp. 3–9.
2. Ashcroft did not violate clearly established law and thus is enti
tled to qualified immunity. A Government official’s conduct violates
clearly established law when, at the time of the challenged conduct,
“[t]he contours of [a] right [are] sufficiently clear” that every “reason
able official would have understood that what he is doing violates
that right.” Anderson v. Creighton, 483 U. S. 635, 640. Here, the as
serted constitutional right falls far short of that threshold. At the
time of al-Kidd’s arrest, not a single judicial opinion had held that
pretext could render an objectively reasonable arrest pursuant to a
material-witness warrant unconstitutional. The Ninth Circuit’s reli
ance on a District Court’s footnoted dictum, irrelevant cases from this
Court, and the Fourth Amendment’s broad purposes and history is
rejected. Because Ashcroft did not violate clearly established law, the
question whether he enjoys absolute immunity need not be ad
dressed. Pp. 9–12.

580 F. 3d 949, reversed and remanded.


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
SCALIA, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., joined. KENNEDY, J., filed
a concurring opinion, in which GINSBURG, BREYER, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ.,
joined as to Part I. GINSBURG, J., filed an opinion concurring in the
judgment, in which BREYER and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined. SOTOMAYOR,
J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment, in which GINSBURG and
BREYER, JJ., joined. KAGAN, J., took no part in the consideration or de
cision of the case.

